EXECUTIVE SUMMARY The Austrian economy has stagnated since the second quarter of 2012. Export growth declined significantly and domestic demand, in particular investment, has been weak despite a robust labour market and favourable financing conditions. GDP growth is expected to resume and improve in 2015-16, assuming that international trade picks up and investment responds more vigorously to supportive financing conditions, also in light of recent quantitative easing by the European Central Bank. Employment growth has remained positive despite weakening growth dynamics, a trend that is expected to continue in the medium term. The quality of jobs created may give cause for concern, as the role of part-time and low-paid jobs in strengthening employment has been considerable in recent years. Also, despite positive employment growth, unemployment may be slow to decline to pre-crisis levels, as the labour supply is likely to keep increasing, not least through immigration. Despite a solid, but moderate external surplus, Austria has suffered a pronounced loss in world trade market shares. Medium-term trends in foreign demand are expected to present opportunities to Austrian exporters. Still, the last 2-3 years of weak investment may pose downside risks, limiting the extent to which exports can benefit from such a recovery. Fiscal consolidation has slowed down in 2014 due to the cost borne by the government for the financial support of Hypo Alpe Adria Group, which translated into higher deficit and debt ratio. This Country Report assesses Austria's economy against the background of the Commission's Annual Growth Survey which recommends three main pillars for the EU's economic and social policy in 2015: investment, structural reforms, and fiscal responsibility. In line with the Investment Plan for Europe, it also explores ways to maximise the impact of public resources and unlock private investment. The main observations and findings of the analysis are: • Despite tangible progress in the restructuring of nationalised banks, the financial sector remains subject to risks, which could have adverse implications for public finances and financial stability. • The Austrian taxation system and the fiscal framework present weaknesses arising from a high tax wedge, low tax autonomy for subnational governments and a complex system of fiscal relations between the different layers of government. • A number of reforms are being implemented in the fields of pensions and healthcare. However their ability to improve the long.term sustainability of these systems is uncertain. • The main labour market indicators are much more favourable than those of most other EU countries, but labour market participation and educations achievements are low for particular groups of the Austrian population. • Entry and conduct restrictions for service providers and insufficient competition do not favour a dynamic business environment, investment and an efficient resource allocation. Mismatched skills of university graduates compared to labour market demand are also a drag on business innovation. Overall this Country Report finds that Austria has made some progress in addressing the country-specific recommendations issued by the Council in 2014. Significant headway was made in restructuring the nationalized Hypo Alpe Adria Group in the second half of 2014. Over the past year, Austria has continued to implement the reforms already adopted in the pension and in the healthcare sector. Political consultations on a tax reform to reduce the tax wedge as recommended to Austria in 2014 were stepped up, although the financing alternatives of this reform still appear to be controversial at this stage. Some progress has been made to improve the employability of migrants and older workers. There has been limited progress in improving women's labour market prospects and in tackling the challenges faced by the education system. Some country.specific recommendations have remained largely unaddressed. Specifically, no efforts have been made to streamline fiscal relations or to reconsider restrictions and regulations in order to boost competition in services. The Country Report also reveals the following policy challenges: Executive summary • •  The financial system requires close monitoring as latent vulnerabilities are resurfacing. The asset quality of Austrian banks' central, eastern and south-eastern European subsidiaries has remained under pressure. Notwithstanding several supervisory measures adopted in the last couple of years, the stock of foreign currency (mostly Swiss franc) loans warrants close monitoring, especially following the Swiss National Bank's withdrawal of the cap on the rate of the Swiss franc. Against the backdrop of recent geopolitical developments, the exposure of Austrian banks to Ukraine and Russia needs close monitoring. The budgetary impact of population ageing may pose a challenge to long-term fiscal sustainability. The general government debt has increased significantly during the crisis and reached high level. In addition, population ageing poses risks which, without further structural action in the pension and health care sectors, threaten long-term sustainability of public finances.  •  restrictions for providers of especially, but not only, professional services, are still largely in place. This may result in insufficient competition and costly and inadequate business and consumer services. Maintaining a healthy investment rate is essential to growth prospects. The Austrian economy's growth momentum has stalled and investment growth has been muted in recent years. Traditional investment may not be sufficient to avoid a further fall in world market shares going forward. Innovation and start-ups have a significant role to play in reinvigorating investment and boosting the competitiveness of the economy. Enabling factors such as competitive and responsive business services and diversified financing sources would be key to promoting entrepreneurial dynamism.  •  The current organisational relations between levels of government are complex and inefficient. The institutional set-up of public administration, with overlapping responsibilities and mismatch between funding and spending responsibilities, remains a drag on reform design and implementation.  •  Ensuring long-term labour supply, given demographic changes remains a challenge. The low labour market participation of older workers, women and migrants risks eroding Austria’s growth potential and living standards.  •  Austria's education system still features disadvantaged youth underachievement and insufficient market relevance of  qualifications. The strong link between education performance and socio-economic background continues to give cause for concern. The dropout rate in higher education is still high and a gap remains between graduates' qualifications and market demand.  •  More competition would benefit enterprise and innovation. Market entry and conduct  