EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 



Austria’s strong economic performance offers a 
window of opportunity to improve potential 
growth and address remaining challenges. The 
sound economic outlook provides a supportive 
environment to further strengthen public finances, 
social outcomes, and innovation. Austria could 
also benefit from further measures to improve the 
sustainability of healthcare and pension 
expenditures and to enhance labour market and 
educational outcomes for specific groups where 
vulnerabilities still exist. Together with additional 
efforts to reduce restrictive regulations, this could 
help to boost productivity and potential growth, 
making Austria more resilient to future 
challenges (1). 

(1) This report assesses Austria’s economy in the light of the 
European Commission’s Annual Growth Survey published 
on 22 November 2017. In the survey, the Commission calls 
on EU Member States to implement reforms to make the 
European economy more productive, resilient and 
inclusive. In so doing, Member States should focus their 
efforts on the three elements of the virtuous triangle of 
economic policy — boosting investment, pursuing 
structural reforms and ensuring responsible fiscal policies. 

The Austrian economy is growing robustly, 
supported by strong private consumption and 
investment. After several years of subdued 
progress, GDP growth accelerated to 1.5 % in 
2016 and is expected to have doubled to around 
3 % in 2017. The 2016 tax reform triggered a pick-
up in private consumption that also acted as a 
boost to investment, strengthening domestic 
demand in 2017. On the back of improved 
developments in neighbouring countries and in 
world trade, investment also benefitted from 
markedly increasing exports, reversing in 2017 the 
trend of falling export market shares since the 
financial crisis in 2008. At the same time, the 
strong private consumption and investment growth 
increased imports, leading to only a marginal 
contribution by the external sector to GDP growth. 
For 2018 and 2019, the economic outlook remains 
favourable. GDP growth is expected to be broadly 
unchanged, driven mainly by stable domestic 
demand despite a slightly decreasing contribution 
from investment. The unemployment rate 
decreased from 6.0 % in 2016 to 5.5 % in 2017. 
The upswing phase is also reflected in higher 
headline and core inflation, which remained above 
the euro area average in 2017. 

Good economic conditions and the fade out of 
bank support costs are expected to benefit 

public finances in a no-policy-change scenario. 
After widening in 2016 due to the tax relief, 
headline deficit is expected to improve 
progressively at unchanged policies, with revenues 
benefiting from strong employment and 
consumption growth. Following the financial crisis 
Austria’s government debt increased significantly, 
peaking at 84.3 % of GDP in 2015, due to the 
impact of support measures for the banking sector. 
Government debt declined to 83.6 % of GDP in 
2016 and is expected to continue decreasing to 
below 74 % of GDP in 2019, helped by the 
divestment of impaired assets from asset 
management companies. 

Austria has made some progress in addressing 
the 2017 country-specific recommendations. 
With regard to ensuring financial sustainability, 
some progress was made on healthcare but no 
progress was made on the pension system. Limited 
progress was made towards reforming fiscal 
relations between the various levels of 
government. Austria has made some progress in 
improving the labour market participation of 
women, but childcare provision is still below the 
targets for the under 3 years old and regional 
differences persist. Limited progress has been 
made in improving the educational achievements 
of disadvantaged young people. Some progress 
was made in reducing investment barriers in the 
services sector. 

Regarding progress in reaching the national targets 
under the Europe 2020 strategy, Austria has 
already reached its targets on tertiary education 
attainment and limiting early school leaving. It is 
on track to meet the employment and the 
renewable energy targets. However, more effort is 
needed to raise research and development 
expenditure, cut greenhouse gas emissions, 
decrease energy consumption and reduce poverty 
and social exclusion. 

Austria performs relatively well on the 
indicators of the Social Scoreboard supporting 
the European Pillar of Social Rights. Austria has 
robust policies to facilitate labour market access 
and to ensure fair working conditions. Policies to 
reduce poverty and social exclusion risks are 
generally effective. Austria has well developed 
institutional social dialogue mechanisms. 


Key structural issues analysed in this report, which 
point to particular challenges for Austria’s 
economy, are the following: 

. Austria’s fiscal framework provides only 
weak incentives to improve cost efficiency. In 
2016 the different levels of government agreed 
on several initiatives that could improve the 
quality of public spending at subnational level. 
These include spending reviews, more task-
oriented financing, benchmark systems, a 
reform of subnational competencies and 
discussions on increasing tax autonomy at 
subnational level. While these initiatives are 
promising, their effectiveness depends on being 
implemented in full. Currently, the spending 
powers of municipal and federal state 
governments remain far greater than their 
revenue-raising responsibilities, giving them 
little incentive to contain costs. 
. The overall tax burden on labour is 
comparatively large, while more growth-
friendly sources of revenue are underused. 
Despite the 2016 tax reform, the burden on 
labour remains high and is set to increase as tax 
brackets are not indexed to inflation. This is 
especially true for low-income earners with 
adverse effects on labour supply incentives. 
Social security contributions represent a 
relatively large share of the tax wedge. 
Conversely, revenues from recurrent property 
taxes are significantly below the EU average 
due to the outdated tax base. 
. The projections for medium- and long-term 
pension and healthcare expenditures point 
to a challenge for fiscal sustainability. 
Current pension expenditure is comparatively 
high and is expected to rise further as life 
expectancy increases while the statutory 
retirement age remains fixed. Closing the gap 
between the effective and statutory retirement 
ages would reduce public spending, but the 
potential savings are lower than for measures 
affecting the statutory retirement age. For the 
healthcare sector, the main driver of the high 
expenditure is an over-sized hospital sector, 
which is the result of a fragmented financial 
and organisational structure. There are 
efficiency gains to be made both at the system 
level, by shifting services to the less costly 
outpatient sector, and within the hospital sector 
itself by improving the use of public 
procurement. In this context, implementing the 
ongoing reform aimed at strengthening primary 
healthcare in full could contribute to reduce the 
size of the hospital sector. Enforcing 
expenditure ceilings may also help containing 
the projected spending increase. 
. Banking sector resilience continues to 
improve, but some pockets of vulnerability 
still warrant monitoring. The capitalisation of 
Austrian banks increased substantially in 2016 
but profitability in the domestic market remains 
under pressure. Foreign-currency loans granted 
by banks on the local market have further 
declined but are still a matter of concern. The 
asset quality and profitability of subsidiaries in 
central, eastern and south-eastern Europe 
continue to improve, whereas the exposure of 
Austrian banks to several markets has declined 
following the restructuring of UniCredit. 
Despite several challenges over recent years, 
Austrian insurance companies have managed to 
adjust relatively well to the low interest rates. 
The winding-down of the asset management 
companies is proceeding better than expected 
and overall risks are limited. 
. House prices have grown considerably in 
recent years but overall risks to financial 
stability seem contained. Prices have risen 
particularly strongly in the Vienna region, 
where some overvaluation can be observed. 
Housing investment has been subdued in recent 
years compared to the relatively strong 
population growth, but picked up in 2017. 
Nevertheless, the price increases do not appear 
to be credit-driven as the level of household 
mortgages remains relatively low. Furthermore, 
the rental market and social housing play a 
strong role in Austria, so that the house price 
increase mainly affects wealthier households as 
well as tenants in the private urban rental 
market. The macro-prudential toolkit has been 
strengthened and can be activated to contain 
potential risks from real estate. 
. Austria’s labour market performance is 
improving but challenges for specific groups 
remain. Over several years, immigration and 
overall increasing labour market participation 



led to a rapid expansion of the labour force that 
outpaced strong employment growth, causing 
moderate increases in the unemployment rate. 
In 2017 the unemployment rate started to fall 
on the back of a further acceleration in 
employment growth. Austria has reached a 
high employment rate of 75.3 % in Q3 of 2017, 
thus meeting the Europe 2020 target. Wage 
increases were moderate, improving Austria’s 
competitive position. The high proportion of 
women in part-time work and the high gender 
pay gap remain issues of concern. This is partly 
due to the still comparatively scarce and 
uneven provision of childcare for children 
below 3 years. The labour market integration of 
people with a migrant background including 
refugees is also a policy challenge. So is the 
digital transformation of the economy. 
. Overall, social indicators reflect the good 
economic conditions, but vulnerabilities for 
certain groups still exist. The number of 
people at risk of poverty and social exclusion 
has continued to decline. By contrast, in-work 
poverty is rising, especially among foreign 
workers. In addition, while benefit adequacy 
has been overall favourable, the cuts in means-
tested minimum income implemented in 
several federal states may put larger families at 
risk of poverty. The risk of poverty and social 
exclusion for women above 65 years is higher 
than for men, also due to a gender gap in 
pensions. Wealth inequality is particularly 
high. 
. Learning outcomes of disadvantaged 
students have not improved. New reforms in 
education were introduced but their impact has 
yet to materialise. The second package of the 
reform agenda has increased schools’ 
autonomy, the regional coordination of schools 
and the availability of all-day schools. 
Nevertheless, recent national and international 
testing both point to a comparatively weak 
performance by Austrian students. Students' 
educational outcomes also continue to depend 
heavily on their socio-economic background 
and on whether they have a migrant 
background. At the same time, Austria’s 
tertiary education attainment rate has reached 
the national and Europe 2020 target. Several 
policy initiatives have been launched to help 
integrate refugees and people with a migrant 
background into the education system, as well 
as to encourage adult learning and improve 
digital education. 
. Restrictive regulation in Austria’s services 
markets hampers productivity and 
discourages innovation and investment. 
Austria has high access barriers and restrictive 
rules on the exercise of key trades and 
professions. These include specific 
shareholding requirements, extensive reserved 
activities and interdisciplinary restrictions. 
High regulatory burdens also bear on the retail 
and tourism sectors. These barriers, burdens 
and restrictions are limiting investment, job 
creation and innovation in the services sector 
itself. They also affect other parts of the 
economy for which competitive and innovative 
services are a crucial input. 
. Stagnating productivity requires a strong 
focus on boosting innovation results and 
supporting innovative businesses. Austria is 
investing heavily in research and innovation 
but has not yet managed to overcome the 
stagnation in total factor productivity. 
Strengthening science-business links and 
supporting knowledge-intensive sectors remain 
therefore important. Austria’s eco-system for 
starting and, even more so, for scaling-up 
innovative businesses remains a policy 
challenge. Apart from regulatory barriers, the 
lack of later stage funding options, such as 
venture capital, play a role, as well as skill 
shortages in some professions. 
. Austria faces a challenge in spreading digital 
technologies including broadband and 
business models among small and medium-
sized enterprises (SMEs). Austria is well-
advanced in digitalising its public 
administrations and larger companies are well 
placed to exploit the opportunities of the digital 
economy. SMEs, the backbone of the Austrian 
economy, and micro-enterprises, are lagging 
behind. Austria has only started to address this 
issue with initiatives supporting digitalization 
of SMEs. High-speed connectivity in rural 
areas is also an issue. Austria’s national 
digitalization strategy still lacks monitoring and 
systematic performance review tools. 



