 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

In 2011, the Austrian economy surpassed its pre-crisis output and employment levels. 
GDP growth strengthened to 3.1%, significantly above the EU average. Employment 
grew at 1.4% compared to the year before, bringing the employment rate to an estimated 

75.2 %. Austria's economic activity is expected to significantly slow down as compared 
to 2011. GDP growth is projected to increase by 0.7%. Unemployment is foreseen to 
slightly increase - to 4.3%. 
With the adoption of the fiscal consolidation package at the beginning of 2012, Austria 
has embarked on a path towards more sustainable public finances. Measures were 
notably taken among others to reduce expenditure on pensions, subsidies and public 
servants' salaries as well as to close loopholes in VAT collection. They were 
complemented by measures aimed at expanding child-care and all-day school places. At 
the end of 2011, a debt brake starting in 2017 was introduced, however not in the 
Constitution. 

Even though the Austrian economy and labour market have been performing well in 
comparison to other Member States, the country faces numerous challenges. Since the 
countryÕs labour force potential is projected to shrink from 2020 onwards, Austria needs 
to tap the full potential of the working age population, in particular of older workers. 
Faced with increasing competition from low-cost countries, Austria needs to improve its 
non-price competitiveness through increased emphasis on research and innovation. The 
supply of skilled human resources at all educational levels, but especially at tertiary 
level, is too low. The long-term growth prospects of the economy will depend 
increasingly on a diversifying services sector and a business environment conducive to 
innovation and entrepreneurial dynamism. However, entry barriers currently hamper 
sound competition. Austria also faces particular challenges due to the high exposure of 
its banks to the countries of Central and Eastern Europe. The fiscal relations between the 
federal, regional and local governments are the source of widely recognised 
inefficiencies Ð not adequately addressed until now. 

3 


