The Belgian economy strengthened in 2014 though years of stagnating activity have left their mark. Belgium has entered a slow-moving recovery with GDP growth expected to accelerate from 1% in 2014 to 1.4% in 2016 thanks to company investments and external trade. The unemployment rate is projected to decrease from a ten-year high of 8.5% last year to 8.1% in 2016 as job creation in the private sector picks up. The rising trend of public debt is expected to be halted with debt stabilising at around 107% of GDP in 2016, but debt reduction is hampered by low growth and inflation. The latter has fallen back to around zero and is forecast to increase gradually from the second half of 2015. This Country Report assesses the Belgian economy against the background of the Commission's Annual Growth Survey. The latter recommends three main pillars for the EU's economic and social policy in 2015: investment, structural reforms, and fiscal responsibility. In line with the Investment Plan for Europe, it also explores ways to maximise the impact of public resources and unlock private investment. Finally, it assesses Belgium in the light of the findings of the 2015 Alert Mechanism Report, in which the Commission found it useful to further examine the persistence of imbalances or their unwinding. The main findings of the In-Depth Review contained in this Country Report are as follows:  . While the loss of external competitiveness incurred continues to pose macroeconomic risks for the Belgian economy, the magni-tude of these risks has decreased. Regarding cost parameters, corrective measures have started narrowing the labour cost gap. Closing it entirely will require additional action and preventing new gaps from emerging hinges on reforms of the wage bargaining system. Energy input costs are found to saddle large industrial users with a competitive disadvantage as well. Scope for improving the non-cost dimension of external competitiveness is considerable, with Belgium not performing particularly strongly with respect to innovation output. . Public debt remains high but several factors temper associated macroeconomic risks. On the one hand, vulnerability stems from the reduced room to absorb future shocks. Sizeable, though decreasing, contingent liabili-ties related to financial sector guarantees and high domestic debt ownership imply important feedback loops. On the other hand, medium-term sustainability risks appear more manage-able given low financing costs, the resumption of primary surpluses and the relatively long average maturity of the debt stock. The strong financial position of Belgian households is a particularly important factor. Despite the high public debt, the Belgian economy continues to enjoy a very positive net asset position so that, overall, short to medium term risks are contained. This is also in line with the track record in the recent and more distant past. . Macroeconomic risks stemming from the interplay between household debt, the financial sector and a potential correction of housing prices are found to be moderate and expected to be manageable. Robust household balance sheets, high ownership rates, housing shortages, reasonable affordability, and demo-graphic projections are likely to prevent an abrupt housing price decline. The impact on banks of potential downward price adjustments or adverse income shocks should be limited thanks to sound lending standards. The country report also analyses other macro-economic and structural issues and the main findings are as follows: . Structural problems characterising the Belgian labour market result in a chronic underutilisation of labour with a low aggre-gate employment rate. Shortcomings are related to labour taxation and financial disin-centives, educational outcomes and qualifica-tion mismatches, the wage-setting system, labour shortages, and old-age social security systems. Both young and elderly workers face important barriers to entry. People from migrant backgrounds are in a particularly precarious position. . The Belgian tax system is characterised by a high overall burden and by relatively high rates and narrow tax bases. The tax burden is heavily skewed towards labour. This results in high labour costs, which discourage job crea-tion, and large tax wedges, which contribute to remaining unemployment traps. Certain features of the tax system are environmentally harmful.  . Competition in several key service sectors remains low. This affects the wider economy given that they supply important inputs. Furthermore, the precarious security of energy supply might persist as a result of inadequate domestic generation capacity, the nuclear phase-out, a rising proportion of intermittent power and the low spare import capacity. There appears to be ample scope to improve public infrastructure through higher investments. In a letter sent to the Commission in November 2014, the Belgian authorities committed to a number of structural reforms implementing the country-specific recommendations issued by the Council in July 2014. These structural reforms were further specified in two reports sent on 30 January 2015 and 13 February 2015. Overall, Belgium has made some progress in addressing the 2014 country-specific recom-mendations. Substantial progress was made in the area of pension reforms, with measures taken to narrow the gap between the effective and the statutory retirement age, as well as the intention to increase the latter in the longer term. Some progress was made towards restoring competitive-ness with corrective measures adopted to narrow the relative labour cost gap and first steps taken to reform the wage-setting system. Some progress was made on the employment challenges with policy responses the least developed with respect to increasing labour market access and participa-tion for disadvantaged groups. At the same time, limited progress has been made towards a comprehensive tax reform entailing in particular a clear shift from labour towards less growth-distorting tax bases. There has also been limited progress on the functioning of retail markets and deregulation of professional services. On the recommendation to ensure that greenhouse gas reduction targets are met, progress is considered limited in the absence of an intergovernmental agreement on the distribution of efforts and auctioning revenues. Finally, progress to align the contribution of transport with the objective of reducing road congestion was limited. The Country Report reveals policy challenges stemming from the analysis.  . Sustained consolidation efforts would be instrumental in reducing risks resulting from public indebtedness. To offset the budgetary impact of an ageing population, a successful consolidation strategy depends on the swift implementation of planned pension reforms, as well as other reforms to lift economic growth. . Pursuing tax reforms aimed among other things at rebalancing the tax system towards non-labour tax bases would promote the further unwinding of the competitiveness imbalance. Tax bases with scope for broadening include, among others, envi-ronmental and consumption taxes, certain types of financial income, and recurrent property taxation. In addition, efforts to make wage formation more responsive to the business cycle and productivity evolutions would ease the impact on job creation. . A stronger performance on innovation and R&D valorisation could improve the non-cost dimension of competitiveness. The same holds for reducing red tape and administrative barriers, and tackling rigidities affecting product, service and the labour market. This would also strengthen the investment climate. . Efforts to lift employment would be helped by preventing early school leaving and a reduction of inequalities of educational outcomes. In view of the low labour market participation of the young and people with a migrant background, the timely provision of customised activation trajectories remains crucial. Policies to promote active ageing and increase demand for elderly labour would assist measures to reduce early exit possibilities.  . Eliminating infrastructure bottlenecks and improving the quality and adequacy of the capital stock would strengthen overall eco-nomic performance. Particular attention could be paid to transport and to preventing disruptions to the energy supply by enhancing grid interconnectivity and domestic generation capacity. 