EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 



The favourable economic environment provides 
a window of opportunity to boost the reform 
momentum tackling long-term challenges in the 
area of public finances, labour market 
participation and investment(1). Recent 
structural reforms have borne fruit in terms of an 
improved competitiveness and a job-rich recovery. 
Potential growth is trending upward since it 
bottomed out in 2013. Nevertheless, it remains 
below its pre-crisis estimates as remaining barriers 
to competition in market services and a narrow 
innovation base weigh on productivity growth. 
While recent government measures have spurred 
employment growth, a high inactivity rate 
combined with a high vacancy rate is suggesting a 
high level of skills mismatches. The quality of the 
transport network is low and reflects the low level 
of public investment. 

(1) This report assesses Belgium’s economy in the light of the 
European Commission’s Annual Growth Survey, published 
on 22 November 2017. In the survey, the Commission calls 
on EU Member States to implement reforms to make the 
European economy more productive, resilient and 
inclusive. In so doing, Member States should focus their 
efforts on the three elements of the virtuous triangle of 
economic policy — boosting investment, pursuing 
structural reforms and ensuring responsible fiscal policies. 

Economic growth is expected to have 
accelerated to 1.7 % in 2017 underpinned by 
robust domestic demand for both private 
consumption and investment purposes. 
Household consumption is expected to gain 
momentum in 2017-2019 in line with the projected 
increase in disposable income. Business 
investment is expected to continue expanding over 
the forecast period, supported by sizeable liquidity 
reserves and favourable financing conditions with 
persistently low interest rates. The contribution of 
net exports is estimated to have improved after 
being a drag on growth in the previous year. 

Recent developments suggest that the inflation 
differential with the euro area is decreasing 
Between 2018 and 2019 Belgium's economic 
growth is projected to accelerate, progressing to an 
average annual pace of 1.8 %. This compares with 
an average growth of 1.4 % between 2014 and 
2016. 

Though falling public debt is still high. Since 
peaking in 2014 at 106.8 % of GDP, public debt 
has been falling very gradually. The general 
government deficit is expected to have dropped 

significantly in 2017. In 2018, only a moderate 
progress is expected unless additional budget 
measures are taken. There remains a wide gap 
between the estimated structural deficit in 2017 
and the country’s medium-term objective of a 
balanced budget in structural terms. 

Belgium has made limited progress in 
addressing the 2017 country-specific 
recommendations. There has been limited 
progress with distributing fiscal targets among the 
various levels of government in a way that can be 
enforced and with improving the composition of 
public expenditure. Some progress has been made 
with eliminating tax breaks that causes distortions. 
There are no plans at federal level to introduce a 
systematic review of public spending as a 
permanent feature of budget planning. However, 
the National Plan for Strategic Investment provides 
for an increase in infrastructure investment. Some 
progress has been made as regards equal 
opportunities to participate in quality education 
and vocational training, as Communities are 
phasing in major school reforms, but progress on 
equal access to the labour market remains limited. 
There has been some progress with encouraging 
investment in knowledge-based capital, even if 
measures vary in scope at the regional, community 
and federal levels. Progress on sectoral regulation 
has been overall limited. For certain professional 
services regulatory restrictions impact competition. 
Limited progress has been made in improving the 
functioning of the retail sector for the benefit of 
businesses and consumers and in improving 
market mechanisms in network industries. 

Regarding Belgium's progress towards its national 
targets under the Europe 2020 strategy, the 
employment rate target of 73.2 % is still out of 
reach, despite substantial job creation. It is at risk 
of failing to meet the targets for greenhouse gas 
emissions, renewable energy, energy efficiency 
and reducing the risk of poverty. By contrast, 
Belgium reached its early school leaving target in 
2016 and is broadly on track to reach the targets 
for R&D intensity and increasing tertiary 
educational attainment. 

Belgium performs globally well on the 
indicators of the Social Scoreboard supporting 
the European Pillar of Social Rights, whilst 
challenges remain. Participation in adult learning 
is relatively low and educational outcomes show 


considerable variations linked to socio-economic 
status and migrant background. Some population 
groups including people with a migration 
background could be better integrated in the labour 
market. Belgium has one of the largest gaps 
between the risk of poverty or social exclusion for 
persons with disabilities and those without. 
Belgium has good outcomes in terms of gender 
equality and childcare. 

Key structural issues analysed in this report, which 
point to particular challenges for Belgium's 
economy, are the following: 

. Sustainability of public finances remains a 
challenge. The pension reforms enacted in 
2015 were a first significant step to address 
risks related to the long-term cost of ageing. 
Nevertheless, recent projections point to a large 
increase in long-term expenditure for both 
pensions and long-term care. Fully 
implementing the different steps envisaged by 
the reform would help reduce these risks. In 
particular, plans to introduce a credit based 
public pension system may improve long-term 
fiscal sustainability, by providing for automatic 
adjustment mechanisms in response to 
structural demographic or economic changes. 
Risks of fiscal stress appear to be contained in 
the short term. Furthermore, contributions to 
the Belgian Deposit Guarantee Scheme are not 
invested in a separate portfolio of low-risk 
assets. 
. There is scope to give spending restraint a 
larger role in fiscal consolidation. Total 
public expenditure as a percentage of GDP is 
above the euro area average. At present, no 
level of government in Belgium is bound by 
domestic expenditure rules, with the exception 
of a ceiling for healthcare spending. This 
prevents spending-based fiscal consolidation. 
. Low productivity growth remains a 
challenge, for future economic prosperity. 
Investment in research and innovation and 
other ‘intangibles’ assets, which have the most 
potential for innovation output, is high but 
rather narrowly focused.Innovation must be 
better diffused and the innovation base must be 
broadened. There is a wide and increasing 
productivity gap between the most productive 
firms and the rest. The share of firms directly 
connected to foreign markets, which appear to 
have higher productivity, is small. Public 
support for R&D has grown much faster than 
business R&D spending. This raises questions 
about the efficacy of the schemes, in the 
absence of in-depth evaluations. 
. Mobility in Belgium suffers from insufficient 
public investment in infrastructure, 
distortive tax incentives, lack of competition 
in transport services, causing major 
congestion and hindering productivity 
growth. Shortfalls in infrastructure investment, 
especially in the road, waterways and rail 
networks, reflect the persistently low level of 
public investment. Combined with perverse tax 
incentives (for company cars), this contributes 
to aggravating Belgium’s traffic congestion, 
which is already Europe’s heaviest. The 
environmental gains of the planned change in 
the system of company cars may be very 
limited. Belgium remains Europe’s most 
congested country in terms of hours wasted in 
traffic and delays, in particular around Antwerp 
and Brussels. This is unlikely to change in the 
short run, partly because of long delays in 
several major public infrastructure projects. 
Several transport services markets are also not 
open to competition. 
. Belgium ranks among the poorest 
performers in the EU on entrepreneurship. 
A still heavy administrative burden weighs on 
businesses and digitisation of public services, 
including courts. Although several policy 
measures have been adopted in recent years to 
foster entrepreneurship, there is evidence that 
start-ups or businesses without a mature 
balance sheet have difficulty accessing 
traditional bank financing. 
. High restrictions in some professional 
services and the construction sector hold 
back competition, and the retail sector still 
faces challenges. Belgium's productivity 
would benefit from tackling barriers in 
services. Low competitive pressures in services 
markets are also harming manufacturing 
industries, which increasingly depend on 
services inputs. Retail prices remain relatively 
high despite recent measures to improve the 



functioning of the retail sector. Recent 
legislatives changes, such as the regulation of 
night work, are welcome, but more flexibility is 
needed to fully exploit their potential. 
. Employment growth has recently been 
sound, but labour market participation 
remains low. Unemployment has declined to 
pre-crisis levels. Nevertheless, the employment 
rate remains low and a relatively large 
proportion of the labour force is inactive. 
Disincentives to work remain high in spite of 
efforts to reduce the labour tax wedge (the 
difference between the total employer’s labour 
cost and the worker’s take-home pay). At the 
same time, the vacancy rate is among the 
highest in the EU. This suggests major skills 
mismatches related to, among other factors, 
historical high labour costs and taxation, low 
mobility and inadequate language skills. There 
are also persistent strong regional disparities in 
labour market performance. Inactivity and 
unemployment are largely concentrated among 
low-skilled, young, people with a migrant 
background, older workers and people with 
disabilities. There is evidence that activation 
measures are not equally effective for all 
population groups. Some specific groups, such 
as persons in quasi jobless households with 
children, show higher poverty rates than the 
EU average. 
. Belgium combines good overall education 
performance with high educational 
inequalities. Children with a disadvantaged 
background including those with a migrant 
background do not have equal opportunities to 
access quality education. The proportion of 
graduates in science, technology and 
mathematics is one of the lowest in the EU. 
Top performance is declining, particularly in 
mathematics. There are wide performance gaps 
between schools and major differences between 
the Communities. Growth in the school 
population is one of the highest in the EU. The 
share of disadvantaged groups will increase, 
making challenges in education more difficult 
to address. Both the Flemish and the French 
Communities have embarked on major reforms 
of their education systems. Their 
implementation is planned over the next decade 
and beyond. 
. In spite of recent reforms, the Belgian tax 
system remains complex. The reform of the 
corporate income tax will lower statutory rates 
and help simplify the system. Nevertheless, 
many exemptions and distortionary incentives 
remain, as the rising trend in the total amount 
of tax breaks shows. The opportunity to shift 
taxes to more growth-friendly bases could be 
further used. Revenues from environment 
related taxes are still among the lowest in the 
EU. Finally, some features of the Belgian 
taxation system, in particular the lack of 
specific anti-abuse rules for the notional 
interest deduction regime may facilitate 
aggressive tax planning via ‘cascading’. 
. The distribution of debt and assets across 
households reveals some pockets of 
vulnerability, despite their overall 
favourable wealth position. A prolonged 
period of house prices increasing faster than 
households' disposable income has made the 
financial situation of households more fragile 
through an almost mechanical increase in their 
debt. Although measures have been announced, 
the complex national macro-prudential 
decision-making process may leave financial 
stability risks unaddressed. House prices 
appear currently to be slightly overvalued. 
. Belgium’s environment and climate policies, 
although performing well in some areas, are 
still not doing enough to reduce local air 
pollution and greenhouse gas emissions. 
Belgium is not fully exploiting its potential to 
become a low-carbon innovation leader. Plans 
to decarbonise the economy while guaranteeing 
the security of supply will require significant 
investment in the energy system and in 
innovation. The EU’s investment instruments 
could be deployed to support these efforts. 



