EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 



Bulgaria's strong economic situation could 
facilitate structural reforms. Strong economic 
growth and a sound fiscal position represent an 
opportunity for structural reforms that could 
accelerate catching up with the rest of the 
European Union and reduce persistent high levels 
of poverty and inequality. The economy's cyclical 
upswing helped a solid labour market recovery, but 
persistent skills shortages and mismatches require 
a structural response. The authorities' response to 
the challenges in banking and non-banking 
strengthened the financial sector and these reforms 
need to be completed to consolidate recent 
progress. (1) 

(1) This report assesses Bulgaria’s economy in the light of the 
European Commission’s Annual Growth Survey published 
on 22 November 2017. In the survey, the Commission calls 
on EU Member States to implement reforms to make the 
European economy more productive, resilient and 
inclusive. In so doing, Member States should focus their 
efforts on the three elements of the virtuous triangle of 
economic policy – boosting investment, pursuing structural 
reforms and ensuring responsible fiscal policies. At the 
same time, the Commission published the Alert 
Mechanism Report (AMR) that initiated the seventh round 
of the macroeconomic imbalance procedure. The AMR 
found that Bulgaria warranted an in-depth review, which is 
presented in this report. 

Economic growth remains robust, but catching-
up with the rest of the EU is slow. GDP growth is 
estimated to have been 3.8 % in 2017, slightly 
lower than 2016. The main engine of growth, 
however, has changed from the external sector to 
domestic demand as private consumption grew 
stronger and investment growth turned positive. In 
2018 and 2019, GDP growth is expected to slow 
down somewhat but to remain strong, still mainly 
driven by domestic demand. Despite the positive 
economic outlook, convergence with the EU 
average income slowed down again in 2017 as 
growth in the rest of the EU has picked up. 
Increasing the growth potential of the economy 
could accelerate the catching-up process, but 
moderate increases in capital and labour limit the 
growth potential. Further gains in total factor 
productivity, the main driver of potential GDP 
growth since 2015, could be constrained by 
relatively low investment. 

Labour market conditions have recently 
improved. Employment and activity rates have 
increased, while the unemployment rate has 
decreased substantially, to 6.3 % in 2017. Based 

on 2016 data, the compensation of employees was 
very low relative to the EU average. The strong 
wage growth in 2017 will improve wages, but if 
continued and not accompanied by similar 
productivity developments it could lead to 
competitiveness losses. Low educational outcomes 
and inequalities linked to socio-economic 
background represent major obstacles to human 
capital improvement, with potential knock-on 
effects on skill levels and the growth potential. 

The fiscal performance remains sound creating 
room to address economic and social challenges. 
The general government budget remained balanced 
in 2017 in both nominal and structural terms and 
public debt decreased. The fiscal outlook remains 
positive in the medium term with a small surplus 
projected for 2019 and could be further reinforced 
by improvements in tax collection, as planned by 
the authorities. On the expenditure side, while 
budget planning and execution are overall sound 
and stable, there is room to improve efficiency and 
monitoring of public spending to support economic 
and social development and convergence. 

The soundness of the financial sector continued 
to improve despite remaining vulnerabilities. 
Capital and liquidity levels have increased and the 
quality of assets has improved. Profitability 
remained strong. Households are among the least 
indebted in the EU but non-financial corporations' 
debt, and non-performing loans are still higher 
than in peer countries, albeit decreasing. Still, 
some vulnerabilities persist despite measures to 
follow-up the banking and non-banking sector 
reviews and increased supervisory efforts. 

Bulgaria has made some progress in addressing 
the 2017 country-specific recommendations. 
Some progress was achieved in tax collection and 
tax compliance, in stepping-up enforcement 
measures to reduce the informal economy and 
undeclared work,, in taking follow-up measures on 
the financial sector reviews and in enhancing 
banking and non-banking supervision, in 
facilitating the reduction of non-performing 
corporate loans, in improving the targeting of 
active labour market policies and the integration 
between employment and social services, in 
improving the coverage and adequacy of the 
minimum income, and in ensuring efficient 
implementation of the 2014-2020 National Public 
Procurement Strategy. Limited progress was made 


in increasing the provision of quality mainstream 
education, in particular for Roma, in increasing 
health insurance coverage, in reducing out-of-
pocket payments, in addressing shortages of 
healthcare professionals, and in establishing a 
transparent mechanism for setting the minimum 
wage. 

Regarding progress in reaching the national targets 
under the Europe 2020 strategy, Bulgaria appears 
to be already ahead in reaching its targets for 
reducing greenhouse gas emissions and increasing 
the share of renewable energy. Measures have 
been taken to improve energy efficiency but 
energy consumption remained above the indicative 
national targets. Bulgaria has made progress on the 
employment rate and tertiary education, but the 
targets are still to be met. The situation has 
deteriorated regarding the targets on early school 
leaving, poverty reduction and R&D intensity. 

Bulgaria faces challenges with regard to a 
number of indicators of the Social Scoreboard 
supporting the European Pillar of Social Rights. 
Whilst the high economic growth has translated 
into improved employment outcomes, the levels of 
poverty and income inequality remain very high 
and active labour market policies are 
underdeveloped. The education system does not 
fully equip students with relevant skills and access 
to quality education remains unequal. Moreover, 
Bulgarians face difficulties in accessing healthcare 
and housing. On the positive side, Bulgaria has a 
low gender employment gap and an increasing 
gross disposable household income per capita. 

The main findings of the in-depth review 
contained in this report and the related policy 
challenges are as follows: 

. The financial sector has been strengthened 
overall, but vulnerabilities remain. 
Substantial effort has been made to improve 
banking and non-banking supervision, with the 
on-going implementation of the action plan for 
banking supervision and the adoption of an 
action plan for non-banking. Legislative 
amendments introduced a somewhat tighter 
risk management of related-party exposures in 
the banking sector and a broader definition of 
‘related parties’ in the non-banking sector, in 
line with international standards. Further 
measures which remain to be fully 
implemented include dealing with exposures to 
hard-to-value assets and in the insurance sector 
with the treatment of specific reinsurance 
contracts and the inadequate group level 
supervision. In the pension funds sector, the 
concentration of assets on the relatively illiquid 
traded and non-traded domestic market, and 
complex ownership and cross-ownership 
structures require further monitoring. 
. Despite the ongoing debt reduction, high 
private debt is still a concern. High non-
financial corporations' debt could hamper 
medium-term growth prospects. Problems with 
the valuation of illiquid assets and the lack of a 
deep secondary market for non-performing 
loans constrain Bulgaria’s ability to reduce this 
high corporate indebtedness. 
. The reform of the insolvency framework 
continues. Despite new legislation on business 
restructuring, some elements of a functioning 
framework are still missing. In particular, 
Bulgaria lacks rules for granting a second 
chance to consumers and entrepreneurs in a 
reasonable timeframe following a bankruptcy, 
and an effectiveness analysis of existing and 
new procedures. Data collection in the field 
remains a challenge. 
. Despite solid labour market recovery 
structural challenges persist. A shrinking 
working age population, skills shortages and 
mismatches, particularly in digital skills, and 
high inactivity remain major concerns for 
sustainable growth. Undeclared work continues 
to distort the labour market. Active labour 
market policies have low coverage and are 
mostly focused on direct job creation and 
employment incentives. The young, the low-
skilled, the Roma and the rural population face 
particular difficulties in entering employment. 
Measures addressing jobseekers' employability 
and skills gaps are not sufficiently developed. 
The minimum wage is still being adjusted 
without a clear and transparent mechanism, in 
part due to the current challenges in social 
dialogue. 


Other key structural issues analysed in this report, 
which point to particular challenges for Bulgaria’s 
economy, are the following: 


. The social protection system is insufficient to 
tackle the significant social issues. The 
percentage of the population at risk of poverty 
or social exclusion is among the highest in the 
EU particularly among the disadvantaged 
social groups. The adequacy and coverage of 
social assistance benefits are low and there is 
no objective mechanism to update the benefits. 
The flat personal income tax has a small 
redistributive impact. Inequality of opportunity 
in education, healthcare and housing remains of 
concern. The provision of social services is 
insufficient and their integration with labour 
market services remains incomplete. 
. Recent measures aim to modernise the 
education system, but challenges remain. 
Educational outcomes are low and strongly 
influenced by socioeconomic status. Early 
school leaving is high and kindergarten fees 
contribute to an unequal start in education. 
Integration of Roma remains a major challenge. 
A mechanism to identify out-of-school children 
has been established, but measures to improve 
school attendance and retention are still 
limited. The insufficient labour market 
relevance of vocational education and training 
remains a challenge. Adult participation in 
learning is insufficient to address the need for 
upskilling. 
. Access to healthcare is limited by low and 
uneven distribution of resources. Public 
healthcare expenditure is very low, resulting in 
a high proportion of non-reimbursed medical 
expenditure. The number of medical doctors is 
relatively high and their emigration has 
decreased. However, district-level differences 
in the distribution of doctors, and the low 
number of nurses, remain a problem. Despite 
improvement in recent years, the number of 
Bulgarians reporting problems with accessing 
healthcare is much higher than the EU average. 
. Efforts to improve the business environment 
are ongoing. Businesses remain concerned 
about corruption, institutional shortcomings 
and insufficient labour supply. Several 
multiannual projects reduced barriers to 
investment but the speed of implementation of 
the reforms is insufficient to catch up with peer 
countries. Slow progress with public 
administration reform, including e-government, 
has held back the quality of public services. 
Despite improvements in public procurement, 
administrative capacity is still weak and the 
measures included in the National Public 
Procurement Strategy have not been assessed 
yet. E-procurement is not yet fully in place and 
the potential of central purchasing remains 
untapped. The fight against corruption has been 
hampered by the fragmented landscape of 
corruption-prevention institutional structures, 
and by procedural and legal obstacles to the 
effective investigation and prosecution of high-
level corruption. Recent efforts to address these 
issues still need to show concrete results. 
Significant progress has been made towards 
reinforcing the independence of the judiciary 
but further follow-up is needed on this as well 
as on addressing other shortcomings in the 
judicial system, which weaken the business 
environment and deter investment. 
. The fiscal performance is sound but there is 
space to improve management and 
governance. Improving tax compliance and the 
efficiency of the tax administration remains a 
key objective for public finances' sustainability 
and the promotion of a socially fair and 
growth-friendly economic environment. Fiscal 
stability is supported by strong political 
commitment and the currency board 
arrangement, but checks-and-balances in the 
fiscal framework are insufficient. Public 
expenditure management is sound in terms of 
monitoring and medium-term planning of the 
main aggregates but is not governed by 
performance goals or benchmarks. Enhancing 
the operation of the Fiscal Council remains a 
challenge. State-owned enterprises are a source 
of economic and fiscal risks, as their corporate 
governance structures are rarely subject to 
professional management or rules that ensure 
independent and transparent decision making. 
. Further challenges exist in specific sectors. 
Shortcomings in the research, development and 
innovation system limit its contribution to 
productivity and growth. Reforms are still 
needed in the energy sector to ensure a reliable, 
competitive and sustainable supply of energy to 
businesses and the society at large. The energy 
saving potential remains untapped and air 



