EXECUTIVE SUMMARY Bulgaria’s economic performance has remained subdued during the post-crisis period. After a decline in economic activity in 2009, growth has been fluctuating around 1 % per year, and is forecast to remain so in the short term. Prices stagnated, followed by deflation in the middle of 2013, which is expected to extend through most of 2015. Political instability and banking sector turbulence had a negative impact on confidence in the second half of 2014. Government finances also deteriorated considerably in 2014. This Country Report assesses Bulgaria's economy against the background of the Commission's Annual Growth Survey which recommends three main pillars for the EU's economic and social policy in 2015: investment, structural reforms, and fiscal responsibility. In line with the Investment Plan for Europe, it also explores ways to maximise the impact of public resources and unlock private investment. Finally, it assesses Bulgaria in the light of the findings of the 2015 Alert Mechanism Report, in which the Commission found it useful to further examine the persistence of imbalances or their unwinding. The main findings of the in-depth review contained in this Country Report are: • Banking sector turmoil in the summer of 2014 revealed institutional and supervisory weaknesses. The supervisory body’s failure to detect significant problems in the fourth largest bank in the country, Corporate Commercial Bank (KTB), points to shortcomings in financial sector supervisory practices and in oversight of concentration risk. This has undermined the credibility of banking supervision, in turn also raising doubts concerning the health of other parts of the financial sector. • Concerns have emerged regarding the reliability of reported financial sector data reports . The liquidity crisis over the summer of 2014 revealed a capital shortfall and led to the revocation of Corporate Commercial Bank’s banking licence. The guaranteed deposits held therein, amounting to some 5 % of GDP, were paid out after a significant delay. Prior to these developments, the bank’s reported asset quality was remarkably high, which the subsequent investigation showed to have been grossly misreported. In addition, shortcomings were discovered with the bank’s collateralisation practices and with its capital adequacy. KTB was an extreme case, but reported figures suggest that there could be shortcomings in other banks as well. Weaknesses may also extend to the non.banking financial sector, particularly in connection to concentration risk and related.party exposures in pension schemes. • Deleveraging pressures on non-financial corporations, amplified by deflation, could dampen investment and growth in the short and medium term. A large proportion of corporate liabilities, also seen as part of the negative net international investment position, are in the form of cross-border intra-company loans. Nevertheless, deflationary pressures could limit companies’ debt servicing capacity. Furthermore, parts of the economy may face credit constraints during banking sector restructuring after the collapse of KTB. Corporate liabilities in the non-financial sector — including arrears and liabilities towards the government — may also be affected, creating a negative feedback loop for the entire economy. • As economic growth is still insufficient to support sustainable recovery in employment, the labour market continues to be an area of serious concern. The crisis’ negative effect on employment has not been confined to traditionally vulnerable labour market groups. Unemployment is mostly long.term, underlining its largely structural nature, in the absence of well-targeted and sufficient activation policies for the most vulnerable. School-to-job transition is still problematic. The low quality of education and training systems and their limited relevance to the labour market hampers the supply of a suitably.skilled labour force to the economy. Poverty and social exclusion remain a particular concern for Bulgaria, underpinned by high levels of income inequality. The country report also analyses other macroeconomic issues and the main findings are: • Amid weak economic growth and protracted deflation, social pressures and contingent liabilities generated by unreformed sectors pose a threat to fiscal sustainability. Without structural reforms in pensions and healthcare, fiscal sustainability in the medium and long term cannot be ensured. The financial situation of some large state-owned enterprises in the energy and transport sectors remains fragile and may lead to the accumulation of significant contingent liabilities for the government. Tax collection remains inefficient. • Bulgaria is lagging behind in terms of the quality of several key growth enablers. The country’s growth potential is estimated to be low. Productivity growth is hindered by a number of intertwined weaknesses, ranging from complex regulation and weak administrative capacity, over high compliance costs for businesses, to high energy intensity coupled with low energy efficiency and the poor quality of rail and road transport infrastructure. • The structural impediments to growth are compounded by a judicial system that lacks effectiveness. A key building block for an investor-friendly business environment is an independent, high-quality and efficient judicial system. As shown by the latest report under the Cooperation and Verification Mechanism, in recent years Bulgaria has made only limited progress in reforming its judiciary and fighting corruption, which is found to be very high in a cross-country perspective. Overall, Bulgaria has made limited progress in addressing the 2014 country-specific recommendations. During the past year, Bulgaria made some progress on reducing the administrative burden and reforming higher education. However, insufficient action was taken on increasing tax compliance and improving the quality of public sector administration, improving competition and efficiency in the energy sector and enhancing the quality and independence of the judiciary. There was limited progress on extending the coverage and effectiveness of active labour market policies and reaching out to inactive young people. No action was taken on fighting corruption, reforming the pension system or the general education system, or on alleviating poverty and combating social exclusion, including for marginalised populations such as the Roma. The Country Report reveals a number of policy challenges stemming from the analysis of macroeconomic imbalances, namely: • Without an in-depth, third-party investigation, the soundness of the financial sector cannot be ensured. Banking sector turmoil during 2014 dented confidence in the financial sector. There are doubts over the reported quality of assets in the system, in particular those in the banking sector. A strong, credible and transparent supervisor is required to reduce the risk of imbalances and correct those that have already accumulated. • Weak labour market policies and administratively-set wage floors may still price workers out of the labour market, even as conditions for recovery in employment improve. In particular, the lack of targeted education and training practices and active labour market policies may hinder labour market participation and employability of the workforce. The lack of sound mechanisms to set wage floors in line with economic fundamentals may impact employment, especially of unskilled and low-skilled workers. • A sound and predictable business climate will be important for attracting much needed investment. Red tape in public administration, the low quality of infrastructure, and lack of competition and efficiency in energy diminish the growth potential of the Bulgarian economy. An effective judiciary would also provide a critical degree of predictability in economic relationships, ensuring that citizens, businesses and public officials are all equally accountable under the law. Other challenges are the concerns over fiscal sustainability, also raised by the incomplete fiscal framework, poor tax compliance and a lack of reforms in key sectors, including pensions, healthcare, energy and transport. 