EXECUTIVE SUMMARY In 2014, CroatiaÕs economy contracted for its sixth year in a row and although the recession is expected to come to an end in 2015, the economic outlook remains bleak. The pace of the contraction abated over the course of 2014, bringing the overall fall in GDP to -0.5 %. Growth is set to be just above zero in 2015 and to pickup timidly to 1% in 2016. Against this background, the unemployment rate is not expected to decline significantly from the current 17%. Internal demand should progressively start contributing positively to growth on the back of investments spurred by EU funds, while the export performance should remain strong as the recovery progresses in the EU. Significant fiscal consolidation and deleveraging needs nevertheless weigh on the growth perspectives.  In March 2014, the Commission concluded that Croatia was experiencing excessive macroeconomic imbalances. More specifically the risks stemming from high external liabilities, declining export performance, highly leveraged firms and fast increasing general government debt, all in a context of low growth and poor adjustment capacity, required specific monitoring and strong policy action. The identified imbalances strongly informed the country-specific recommendations issued to Croatia by the Council in June 2014. This Country Report assesses CroatiaÕs economy against the background of the CommissionÕs Annual Growth Survey which recommends three main pillars for the EUÕs economic and social policy in 2015: investment, structural reforms, and fiscal responsibility. In line with the Investment Plan for Europe, it also explores ways to maximise the impact of public resources and unlock private investment. Finally, it assesses Croatia in light of the findings of the 2015 Alert Mechanism Report, in which the Commission found it useful to further examine the persistence of imbalances or their unwinding. The main findings of the In-Depth Review contained in this Country Report are: ¥ Subdued growth, delayed restructuring of firms and the dismal performance of employment are rooted in inefficiencies in the allocation of resources. Low employment is partly related to labour market institutions and policy settings. The unfavourable business environment is a major drag on the adjustment capacity of the economy.  ¥ Weak external competiveness and the large negative international investment position threaten external sustainability. CroatiaÕs export of goods remains far below its potential. Cost and non-cost competiveness factors partly contribute to the weak export base. The large stock of liabilities fuels the outflow of investment income and is a source of vulnerability.  ¥ Rising general government debt is a source of concern, which is aggravated by weaknesses in public sector governance. The prolonged recession coupled with significant assumption of liabilities of public enterprises have resulted in a sharp increase in public debt. The high and rising interest expenditure may signal the kicking-in of a snow-ball effect. Administrative fragmentation and weak public sector governance leads to low efficiency of spending and loose management of public finances.  ¥ Household and corporate debt holds back consumption and investment. Both sectors are deleveraging at a moderate pace, but corporate debt remains highly concentrated in weakly profitable corporations and the relatively high rates of non-performing loans Ð especially in the corporate-sector need monitoring. The Country Report also analyses other macroeconomic and structural issues: ¥ Current policies insufficiently address the needs of vulnerable workers and discourage participation of elderly workers. ¥ The healthcare system is a source of fiscal risks. ¥ Network industries are a bottleneck to the economyÕs growth potential.  ¥ Weaknesses in the education system together with scarce innovation capacity may undermine long-term productivity growth.  ¥ Limited administrative capacity threatens the full absorption of EU funds.  Executive summary There has been some progress in addressing the  ¥  As regard corporate debt, the challenge is to  eight MIP relevant Country Specific  ensure quick access to restructuring and to  Recommendations. The second phase of the  reconcile the protection of creditors and the  labour market reform was fully implemented and  efficiency of the deleveraging process, without  the additional supervisory diagnostic exercises on  undermining financial stability.    banks have been satisfactorily completed,  confirming the resilience of the Croatian banking  ¥  The financial sector faces challenges from  sector. In the majority of areas covered by the  the degree of government intervention in the  recommendations some or limited progress was  economy. Recent policies, including the freeze  registered. Moreover, the MIP relevant country. of the kuna/Swiss franc exchange rate for  specific recommendation to reduce access to early  Swiss franc indexed loans, highlight the need  retirement has remained unaddressed.  for a more predicable legal system, a  proportionate and equitable intervention of the  The Country Report discusses the policy  state in the financial sector and the  challenges stemming from the analysis of macro. implementation of a permanent scheme for  economic imbalances:   dealing with personal insolvency.  ¥ Administrative fragmentation and loose  ¥  Further investments in network  public finances management, including in  infrastructure could enable Croatia to  the health sector, contribute to significant  leverage its geo-strategic position.  inefficiencies in the public sector. A complex  functional distribution of governance  ¥  Mismatches between labour demand and  structures, including a suboptimal articulation  supply hold back employment. Innovation  of the responsibilities of local tiers of  capacity is negatively affected by a low level of  government result in weak control of public  private and public investment in R&D, but also  finances, low efficiency of public spending and  by weaknesses in the governance of public  weak corruption prevention mechanisms.    research and in the design of support  instruments.    ¥ The rigid business environment is a  bottleneck to growth. Strict regulation and  ¥  Inadequate administrative capacities hinder  high administrative and para-fiscal burdens  the full absorption of the EU funds. In  drive up the cost of entrepreneurial activities.  particular the capacities of public  Weaknesses in the application of the regulatory  administration are weak and the transparency  impact assessment and legislative planning  and efficiency of public procurement at both  contribute to regulatory instability.  central and local levels are low.  Competition on the internal market is limited  by the near monopoly regime in which some  companies operate. The large share of public  enterprises in the economy creates an uneven  level playing field for private businesses.  Inefficiencies in the justice system drive up the  cost of litigation.  ¥ Institutional and policy shortcomings affect  the performance of the labour market. The  severance payment regime hinders labour  mobility and discourages the use of open-ended  contracts. The multi-layered social benefits  system and generous early retirement options  create disincentives to work. The wage setting  regime is not conducive to aligning wage  dynamics to macroeconomic conditions.  