EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 



The favourable economic environment lends 
itself to stepping up reform efforts and ensuring 
sustainable and inclusive growth. Croatia's 
potential growth remains insufficient to enable 
faster convergence although projected to increase 
somewhat over the medium term. As the working 
age population continues shrinking and labour 
utilisation remains chronically low, Croatia's 
prospects of speeding up its economic growth will 
increasingly depend on the capacity to implement 
structural reforms. Raising potential growth 
requires structural reforms that will allow for faster 
productivity growth, higher participation in the 
labour market, and a business environment that is 
more attractive for investment (1). 

(1) This report assesses Croatia’s economy in the light of the 
European Commission’s Annual Growth Survey published 
on 22 November 2017. In the survey, the Commission calls 
on EU Member States to implement reforms to make the 
European economy more productive, resilient and 
inclusive. In so doing, Member States should focus their 
efforts on the three elements of the virtuous triangle of 
economic policy - boosting investment, pursuing structural 
reforms and ensuring responsible fiscal policies. At the 
same time, the Commission published the Alert 
Mechanism Report (AMR) that initiated the seventh round 
of the macroeconomic imbalance procedure. The AMR 
found that Croatia warranted an in-depth review, which is 
presented in this report 

As the economy enters its fourth year of 
recovery, economic growth remains broad-
based and robust. Following a sizeable 
acceleration in 2016, the real GDP growth rate in 
2017 is projected to have remained at 3.2 %. 
Household consumption continues to be the main 
driver of growth, underpinned by resumed wage 
growth, steadily increasing employment and high 
consumer confidence. Investment is recovering, 
albeit at a slower pace than anticipated. On the 
external side, strong global demand and further 
market share gains pushed exports up, but the 
associated surge in imports of goods is projected to 
have resulted in net exports slightly detracting 
from growth in 2017. 

The recovery is expected to continue in the next 
two years, with somewhat lower growth rates. 
Low potential output is preventing the economy 
from reaching higher growth rates in the longer 
run. Following several sharp declines in previous 
years, unemployment is set to continue decreasing 
at slower rates, on the back of an expected 
slowdown in outbound migration. Private 
consumption is expected to remain the driver of 

growth, as rising wages are projected to offset the 
effects of the rebound in inflation on disposable 
income. In 2018 and 2019, investment is expected 
to intensify, as uncertainties surrounding the 
restructuring of Agrokor unwind and the use of EU 
funding improves. Exports are projected to 
continue performing strongly, but imports are 
expected to increasingly weigh on the contribution 
of net exports to growth. With its steady 
expansion, tourism creates opportunities for 
employment and growth. However, challenges for 
policy planning to anticipate and respond to the 
growing and diversifying tourism demand lay 
ahead if this sector is to become a key driver of 
continued economic growth. In all, real GDP is 
forecast to expand by 2.8 % in 2018 and a further 
2.7 % in 2019. 

Public and private debt ratios continue 
decreasing, aided by the sustained economic 
recovery and domestic currency appreciation. 
With revenues boosted by the recovering economic 
activity, and spending contained, the general 
government is keeping a low deficit and the public 
debt ratio on a steadily declining path. Debt levels 
in the private sector are also falling, while credit 
activity is slowly picking up. Corporate debt 
remains only slightly above prudential levels, but 
vulnerable to foreign currency shocks. Reflecting 
declining private and public debt, and as the 
current account remains in a comfortable surplus, 
external debt is set to continue reducing. 

Croatia has made limited progress in 
addressing the 2017 country-specific 
recommendations. Fiscal policy, supported by 
favourable macroeconomic conditions, has ensured 
a declining debt ratio, but structural measures have 
not advanced. Legislation needed to reinforce the 
fiscal framework has not been adopted, while the 
previously legislated recurrent property tax has 
been abandoned. Some steps are being taken to 
rationalise the healthcare system, in particular for 
hospitals. However, payment arrears in healthcare 
continue to grow. Measures planned for the social 
benefits system have been narrowed in scope, 
while the package of pension system reforms has 
been further postponed. Active labour market 
policy measures for low-skilled and long-term 
unemployed remain largely underutilised, while 
the education reform is still pending, despite some 
encouraging steps. Major public administration 
reforms are largely at a standstill. Measures to 


improve the business environment have advanced 
somewhat as regards relieving the administrative 
burden and reducing parafiscal charges. Some 
progress has been made in the sale of minority 
shares in state-owned enterprises and activating 
state property, while backlogs in the judicial 
system have marginally reduced. Some measures 
to address the high level of non-performing loans 
were put in place. The Croatian Bank for 
Reconstruction and Development has undergone 
an Asset Quality Review, the results of which are 
yet to be unveiled. 

Regarding progress towards the national targets 
under the Europe 2020 strategy, Croatia is on track 
to reaching its targets, or has already done so, in 
energy efficiency, greenhouse gas emissions, 
renewables (except in transport), early school 
leaving and poverty and social exclusion. The 
target for tertiary education attainment by 2020 
does not appear within reach, while the largest 
distance to target remains in R&D investment. 

Croatia faces challenges with regard to a 
number of indicators of the Social Scoreboard 
supporting the European Pillar of Social Rights. 
These are related to equal opportunities, access to 
the labour market and fair working conditions. 
Economic growth has translated into reducing 
unemployment, but the employment rate remains 
comparatively very low. Croatia still faces a high 
rate of young people not in employment, education 
or training and low participation in active labour 
market policy measures. Croatia has a high share 
of people at-risk-of poverty or social exclusion. 

The main findings of the in-depth review 
contained in this report and the related policy 
challenges are as follows: 

. In 2017, the general government debt ratio 
is projected to have declined further on the 
back of continued growth and fiscal 
discipline. During the protracted crisis, the 
general government debt more than doubled, 
driven largely by deficits and reclassifications 
of state-owned enterprises' debt. The decline in 
the debt ratio from a high of almost 86 % 
started in 2015 and picked up pace in 2016. It 
is expected to have shrunk to around 80 % of 
GDP in 2017 and continue declining in the 
short term. The decrease has been driven by 
economic growth but also expenditure restraint. 
Nevertheless, public debt is still high in 
comparison with both pre-crisis levels and peer 
countries. Sustainability risks in the medium 
term have declined but remain relatively high, 
especially under some stress scenarios. 
Furthermore, it is subject to foreign currency 
risk, as the bulk of it is issued or denominated 
in foreign currency. Positive developments are 
the sustained reduction in the cost of debt 
servicing, the lengthening of maturities 
achieved in recent years as well as some 
improvements in debt management. 
. Private sector debt reduction progressed, 
while still heavily exposed to currency risk. 
The decrease in private debt was driven by 
intensified economic activity. Furthermore, the 
continued appreciation of the national currency 
against the euro reduced the value of 
outstanding liabilities indexed to or 
denominated in foreign currency – a positive 
development that however highlights foreign 
currency risk. The pace of corporate and 
household debt reduction slowed down in 
2017, following a pickup in net credit flows, 
which is supporting investment. However, in 
the corporate sector, debt is concentrated in a 
few segments and remains high relative to the 
sectors' financial assets, which may indicate 
potential solvency risks. 
. Indirect credit risk weighs on the well-
capitalised and increasingly profitable 
financial sector. Credit demand is recovering 
thanks to better macroeconomic conditions and 
lower interest rates. This, coupled with 
continued improvement in the quality of banks' 
assets and profitability, helped turn net credit 
flows positive in 2017. The relatively fast 
reduction of the non-performing loans ratio 
seen in 2016 was halted in 2017, as the 
underlying declining trend was partially offset 
by a net inflow of non-performing loans related 
to Agrokor's defaulted loans. Overall, indirect 
credit risk remains a source of vulnerability for 
the banking sector, in particular due to the 
extensive exposure to foreign currency of its 
corporate and household clients. 
. The labour market continued to improve, 
but participation remains very low. In 2017, 
the unemployment rate fell to 11.1 %. 



Migration outflows and population ageing 
contributed to the reduction of the working age 
population, while activity and employment 
rates for both men and women are very low, 
partly due to care responsibilities and the 
availability of multiple pathways to early exit 
from the labour market. Despite an increase in 
employment on permanent contracts in 2017, 
the share of temporary contracts in total 
employment remains sizable. Youth and long-
term unemployment are also on a downward 
path, but remain high. The social dialogue 
between the government and the social partners 
is overall underdeveloped. 
. Competitiveness and investment are 
hindered by a restrictive business 
environment. The functioning of the product 
and capital markets is constrained, inhibiting 
the smooth allocation of resources to the most 
productive companies and sectors. The 
suboptimal performance of the research, 
development and innovation system represents 
an additional barrier to increasing the 
competitiveness of Croatian businesses. 
Liberalisation is progressing slowly as 
numerous professions and major sectors remain 
highly regulated. There remain a number of 
distortions to competition in the legal 
consultancy and tax advisory. Parafiscal 
charges and the administrative burden continue 
to constrain business creation and expansion. 
The implementation of the anti-corruption 
strategy suffers delays. 


Other key structural issues analysed in this report, 
– which point to particular challenges for Croatia’s 
economy – are the following: 

. The fragmentation of the public 
administration continues to weigh on 
efficiency in the provision of public services. 
Croatia’s marked territorial fragmentation and 
complex relations across levels of government 
are not conducive to the efficient utilisation of 
resources and delivery of public services. Weak 
administrative capacity hinders the 
implementation of public policies and a more 
effective use of European Structural Investment 
Funds. The wage setting framework lacks 
consistency across the public administration 
and public services. While backlogs in courts 
were reduced largely on the back of a reduced 
inflow of new cases, measures to improve the 
efficiency and quality of the justice system 
remain on the agenda. Some progress has been 
made in the disposal of minority ownership, 
and the government's list of companies of 
strategic and special interest has been further 
reduced. A more determined progress on the 
planned privatisation of state-owned 
enterprises has yet to be seen. 
. Although falling, poverty and social 
exclusion levels are still high. This is 
particularly the case for the low skilled, the 
elderly and the disabled. Territorial differences 
are marked, with very high at-risk-of-poverty 
rates in some counties. The uneven provision 
of social services and a fragmented coverage of 
the population by the social protection system 
across the territory exacerbate existing 
disparities in labour market outcomes. The 
length of working lives is one of the shortest in 
Europe, impacting negatively on the adequacy 
of both current and future pensions and 
creating high risks of poverty in old age. 
. Education and health outcomes point to 
structural weaknesses. Education system 
performance indicators have stagnated or 
worsened in most relevant areas, highlighting 
the need for reform. The recent measures to 
implement the national strategy for education, 
science and technology should, if maintained, 
help address the quality and inclusiveness 
challenges. Efforts to improve vocational 
education and training and equip the workforce 
with the skills needed in the labour market 
remain insufficient. Participation in adult 
education remains very low. Health outcomes 
continue to improve, but remain below the EU 
average. Some measures aimed at rationalising 
the hospital system were initiated in 2017. 
Hospitals, however, remain inadequately 
financed and overburdened with arrears. 


 


