EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 



Cyprus' robust economic recovery can help 
accelerate the correction of excessive 
macroeconomic imbalances and provide a 
window of opportunity to implement growth-
enhancing reforms. Macroeconomic imbalances 
are declining but remain significant in several 
areas. These include high levels of public, private 
and external debt, a large negative net international 
investment position and a high stock of non-
performing loans. Unemployment is also declining 
but remains high, in a context of weak potential 
growth. Amid positive macroeconomic 
developments, a renewed reform momentum in 
key areas – e.g. the insolvency and foreclosure 
frameworks, the judicial system, the business 
environment, the public sector, education and the 
labour market – could help improve potential 
growth, reduce vulnerabilities and the risk of a 
slowdown, should the external environment and 
financial conditions become less supportive. (1) 

(1) This report assesses Cyprus’ economy in the light of the 
European Commission’s Annual Growth Survey published 
on 22 November 2017. In the survey, the Commission calls 
on Member States to implement reforms to make the 
European economy more productive, resilient and 
inclusive. In so doing, Member States should focus their 
efforts on the three elements of the virtuous triangle of 
economic policy — boosting investment, pursuing 
structural reforms and ensuring responsible fiscal policies. 
At the same time, the Commission published the Alert 
Mechanism Report (AMR) that initiated the seventh round 
of the macroeconomic imbalance procedure. The 2018 
AMR concluded that an in-depth review should be 
undertaken for the Cypriot economy. The review is 
presented in this report. 

Cyprus is experiencing strong economic growth 
and the labour market is rapidly improving. 
Real GDP growth was robust in 2017 at 3.8 % 
driven by domestic demand, in particular private 
consumption. Investment was mainly concentrated 
on construction linked to the tourism boom and the 
recovery of the real estate sector. Employment rate 
rose by 2.5 pps in 2017Q3 year on year, standing 
at around 71.5 %, while the unemployment rate 
decreased significantly to 10.5 %. Inflation started 
to turn positive albeit at low level. In 2018, 
economic growth is forecast to remain strong but 
decelerate to 3.2 %. 

Overall, Cyprus has made limited progress with 
implementing the 2017 country-specific 
recommendations. After the government’s 
adoption and implementation of an ambitious 
reform agenda during the economic adjustment 

programme, the reform momentum has been more 
modest since 2016. Key public sector reforms are 
pending, notably those concerning public 
administration, local government and state-owned 
entities. Some measures have been taken or 
announced to improve the efficiency of the judicial 
system, but a more comprehensive reform is still at 
an early stage. Administrative measures have been 
taken to reduce the backlog in issuing title deeds. 
Yet, a structural solution to address the 
inadequacies of the property transaction system is 
still lacking. Progress on reducing non-performing 
loans and effectively implementing the insolvency 
and foreclosure frameworks is also limited. While 
the privatisation plan remains largely on hold, the 
action plan for growth is gradually being 
implemented, focussing on improving the business 
environment and boosting strategic investments. 
Concrete steps were taken to increase the capacity 
of the public employment services, while only 
limited progress was made on education. Finally, 
key legislation establishing a National Health 
System was adopted in June 2017 and its 
implementation is under way. 

Regarding progress in reaching the national targets 
under the Europe 2020 strategy, Cyprus has 
reached its objectives for R&D expenditure and is 
making progress in increasing the proportion of 
renewable energy. The rise in energy consumption, 
in line with the economic recovery, weighs on the 
capacity to reduce greenhouse gases emissions and 
meet the energy efficiency target. Cyprus over-
achieved its targets on higher education attainment 
level and on reducing early school leaving. Some 
progress was made on increasing the employment 
rate, but targets on reducing poverty and social 
exclusion remain distant. 

Cyprus faces challenges with regard to a 
number of indicators of the Social Scoreboard 
supporting the European Pillar of Social Rights. 
Strong economic growth has translated into 
improved employment outcomes and a declining 
proportion of people at risk of poverty, except 
among children. However, a growing gender 
employment gap, the high share of young people 
not in education, employment or training and an 
increasing number of early school leavers may 
weigh on current and future equality of 
opportunities. 


The main findings of the in-depth review 
contained in this report, and the related policy 
challenges, are as follows: 

. Private debt continues to be among the 
highest in the EU. The debt of non-financial 
corporations and households has decreased to 
around 250 % of GDP (excluding non-financial 
SPEs) in 2017Q3, primarily driven by 
households’ debt reduction. Despite the robust 
recovery, repayment of debt has only 
marginally improved as contract enforcement 
remains weak and the use of the insolvency and 
foreclosure frameworks is limited. 
. Although still high, public debt is falling 
markedly. Cyprus has significantly accelerated 
debt reduction, notably thanks to a prudent 
fiscal stance and active debt management 
operations. While risks related to high private 
debt levels in the economy remain significant, 
they are mitigated by the country’s favourable 
fiscal position. Cyprus remains vulnerable to 
external shocks and changes in fiscal stance 
and economic outlook. Significant reliance on 
corporate income tax revenues and the 
presence of tax planning businesses exposes 
the country to changes in international tax 
systems. 
. The net international investment position 
(NIIP) remains very negative, but nearly two 
thirds are linked to SPEs. The NIIP has 
decreased in recent years, but remains largely 
negative at 120.6 % of GDP in 2017Q3. 
Excluding the external debt of SPEs, the 
negative NIIP is smaller but still substantial at 
around 44 % of GDP. This highlights Cyprus’ 
dependency on foreign financing sources and 
its vulnerability to shifts in international 
financial market sentiment. The widening 
current account deficit warrants monitoring. 
. The high level of non-performing loans 
(NPLs) remains the key vulnerability of the 
banking sector and affects credit supply. 
NPLs decreased, albeit unevenly across banks, 
as a result of debt restructuring through write-
offs and debt-to-asset swaps. Uncertainties 
remain over the sustainability of banks 
reduction strategies, as loan re-defaults and re-
restructuring remain high and banks' direct 
exposure to the property market increases. The 
limited use of the insolvency and foreclosure 
framework remains an obstacle to the reduction 
of NPLs. Banks still face impediments in 
enforcing their claims on defaulted borrowers 
and weak repayment discipline remains 
problematic. The lack of a secondary market 
for loans and a loan securitisation framework 
also hinders progress. Supervisory pressure has 
led banks to increase their risk provisioning in 
line with the euro area average. This has 
weighed on profitability and the ability to 
increase credit supply. 
. Banks are improving their fundamentals but 
still face challenges as regards performance. 
In 2017, the emergency liquidity assistance was 
repaid and banks continued to accumulate large 
liquidity buffers. This behaviour is explained 
by banks’ reliance on potentially volatile short-
term deposits, notably from non-residents. The 
poor asset quality and the lack of inter-bank 
markets are hindering wholesale long-term 
funding and the build-up of loss absorption 
capacity. Banks’ operational costs remain high. 
Improvements to the governance and 
administrative capacity of insurance and 
pension funds’ supervision remain pending. 
. Inefficiencies in the justice system continue 
to affect contract enforcement and swift 
resolution of civil and commercial cases. 
Cumbersome civil procedures and weak 
enforcement of court decisions weigh on 
banks’ incentives to use the insolvency and 
foreclosure frameworks to reduce their stock of 
NPLs. A series of reforms have started to 
address the most critical problems in the justice 
system, in particular low digitalisation of courts 
and the lack of life-long training of judges. 
. The housing market is recovering. Housing 
transactions have picked up and prices are 
recovering, particularly in the luxury segment. 
This may incentivise mortgage holders in 
difficulty to liquidate the underlying real estate 
collateral, which might in turn help to reduce 
private debt. The increased construction 
activity is supported mainly by self-financing 
and foreign investment. However, major 
obstacles to transferring and issuing property 
title deeds have not yet been resolved. 



. Potential growth is recovering but remains 
subdued. Higher investment and employment 
are lifting potential growth, but it remains 
below the EU average. The main constraining 
factors are low productivity, modest growth-
boosting investment, notably in innovation, 
difficulties to access finance, in particular for 
small businesses, and shortcomings in the 
business environment. 


Other key structural issues analysed in this report 
and pointing to particular challenges for Cyprus' 
economy are the following: 

. The labour market is improving. 
Employment is on the rise and unemployment 
is rapidly decreasing, even though it remains 
high among young people and the long-term 
unemployed. The capacity of the public 
employment services and activation measures 
are improving but are still sub-optimal. 
Outreach to young people not in employment, 
education or training is limited. Conditions of 
employment differ significantly between 
temporary and permanent contracts and 
between public and private sectors, pointing to 
segmentation of the labour market. The share 
of employees covered by collective bargaining 
is lower than the EU average. 
. The modernisation of the education sector 
has advanced albeit important challenges 
remain. Poor educational achievements and 
skills mismatches continue to weigh on 
potential growth. Participation in vocational 
education and training is low and the reform of 
the teachers’ evaluation system is still pending. 
Recent reforms on the appointment of teachers, 
curricula and plans to increase vocational 
education and training capacity are expected to 
improve the current situation. 
. Key steps to reform the healthcare sector 
have been taken and the focus is now on 
implementation. Legislation establishing the 
new National Health System, providing for 
universal health coverage, was adopted. The 
new system aims at improving access to care, 
reduce high levels of out-of-pocket payments 
and increase efficiency of care delivery in the 
public sector. Until the system becomes fully 
functional in 2020, important implementation 
challenges and investment needs are expected. 
. Enforcement of environmental and climate 
regulations remains weak. Recent investment 
has proved insufficient to achieve full 
compliance with environmental regulations, in 
particular in waste and water management. 
Cyprus still lacks effective tools to sustainably 
increase energy and resource efficiency. The 
energy sector reform has made some progress 
and could encourage growth in renewable 
energy. However, Cyprus remains heavily 
dependent on fossil fuels. 
. Some indicators suggest that Cypriot tax 
rules are used by companies engaged in 
aggressive tax planning. Cyprus has taken 
steps to amend aspects of its tax system that 
may facilitate aggressive tax planning. 
However, the existence of specific tax rules 
(e.g. the corporate tax residency rules, the 
absence of withholding taxes on dividend, 
interest and royalty payments by Cyprus 
companies and potential risks associated with 
the design of notional interest regimes), 
combined with the lack of some anti-abuse 
rules, suggest that Cyprus’ corporate income 
tax rules may still be used in tax avoidance 
structures. 
. Inefficiencies in the public sector impact on 
the business environment. Planned reforms to 
modernise the public administration and 
improve its efficiency are pending. Some 
efforts are being made to expand e-government 
services and improve regulatory quality. 
Measures to simplify permits and licensing 
procedures, notably for strategic investments, 
have also been taken. According to relevant 
indicators, competition and qualitative 
assessment in public tenders could be further 
enhanced to strengthen efficiency and 
transparency in public procurement. The 
governance framework for state-owned entities 
remains unconducive to adequate assessment of 
risks and performance improvements. This 
might facilitate the build-up of public 
contingent liabilities and hinder investment 
capacity in key utilities such as telecoms and 
energy. Perceived levels of corruption in the 
public sector are high, which could deter 



