EXECUTIVE SUMMARY The Czech economy returned to growth in 2014, following two years of contraction, and unemployment has been on a declining trend. The return to growth has been largely driven by domestic demand, with investment growing particularly strongly. Household consumption has also returned to growth, reflecting ongoing improvements in the labour market. Export and import growth are expected to have been robust in 2014 and the trade surplus to have grown strongly. Inflation has remained low, however, despite the Czech National Bank maintaining an exchange rate floor. In its most recent forecast, the European Commission projected real GDP growth to have picked up to 2.3 % in 2014 and to increase somewhat further in 2015 and 2016. This represents an outperformance compared to the EU average and may give rise to further income convergence, a process that had stalled since the onset of global financial crisis. The general government deficit has improved significantly in recent years and is expected to have reached 1.3 % of GDP in 2014. The debt-to-GDP ratio remains well below 60 % of GDP. This Country Report assesses the Czech Republic's economy against the background of the Commission's Annual Growth Survey which recommends three main pillars for the EU's economic and social policy in 2015: investment, structural reforms, and fiscal responsibility. In line with the Investment Plan for Europe, it also explores ways to maximise the impact of public resources and unlock private investment. Finally, it assesses the Czech Republic in the light of the findings of the 2015 Alert Mechanism Report, in which the Commission found it useful to further examine the persistence of imbalances or their unwinding. The main observations and findings of the analysis are: ¥ The Czech Republic's public finance outturns have improved markedly, but some issues remain in the areas of taxation, fiscal sustainability and the fiscal framework. The country continues to suffer from a relatively high level of tax evasion, although efforts are being made to counter this. Tax collection remains costly, both for the authorities and for taxpayers. The current design of the fiscal framework has not always ensured sustainable and efficient fiscal outcomes. Projected increases in the pension system and inefficiencies in the health system and healthcare expenditure pose long-term sustainability challenges. ¥ There is an overall high level of employment but certain disadvantaged groups remain underrepresented in the labour market. These groups include parents with young children, low-skilled workers, people with disabilities and Roma. The poor functioning of public employment services does not facilitate adequate transitions from unemployment to employment for these groups, while a persistent lack of affordable and quality childcare services and the limited use of flexible working-time arrangements limit the ability of mothers with young children to remain on the labour market. ¥ Educational outcomes have been improving in recent years but some disparities remain. The Czech schooling system still features disparities in schooling outcomes between regions and social groups, low participation in early childhood education and care, and low attractiveness of the teaching profession. Tertiary and vocational education programmes do not respond adequately to labour market needs. ¥ The weak efficiency and transparency of public institutions in the Czech Republic remain a barrier to more robust investment and growth. The Czech Republic scores poorly on international rankings of the quality of public-sector institutions, in particular as regards corruption. Public procurement procedures are not sufficiently transparent. At the same time, the absorption of EU funds has improved.  ¥ Despite recent improvements, inefficiencies in the business environment still hold back competitiveness of the Czech economy. Weaknesses in the business environment are reflected in the Czech Republic's poor rankings in various international classifications. The number of regulated professions has fallen only moderately in recent years.  ¥ While public investment has increased recently, transport infrastructure remains Executive summary relatively underdeveloped and there is scope  that results from the research and innovation  to further improve energy efficiency.  system remain weak.  Suboptimal transport infrastructure increases  export costs, reduces aggregate cost  ¥  A number of factors limit the short-term  effectiveness and acts as a disincentive to  growth potential of the economy.  private-sector investment. Inefficiencies in the  Inefficiencies in the implementation of  implementation of infrastructural investment  investment projects, particularly in the area of  reduce the ability of responsible bodies to fully  transport infrastructure, and suboptimal energy  absorb available funds, including EU funds.  efficiency reduce the contribution to growth  There is potential to further improve energy  from investment. Inefficient public  efficiency, which could strengthen the  administration and tax collection are  economy's competitiveness and simulate  detrimental to the aggregate cost-effectiveness  private-sector investment.  of the economy, as are supply-side constraints  such as barriers to employment for  Overall, the Czech Republic has made limited  disadvantaged groups and the high number of  progress on addressing the 2014 country. regulated professions.  specific recommendations. This includes  recommendations to: reduce taxation on labour;  reform the pension and healthcare systems;  increase the inclusiveness and quality of education;  accelerate the reform of regulated professions; set  up an effective research and innovation system;  and reinforce the fight against corruption.  However, there has been some progress in the  following areas: increasing growth-enhancing  investment, improving tax compliance;  strengthening the fiscal framework; improving  energy efficiency; developing public employment  services; and improving the management of EU  funds. The adoption of the Act on Child Groups is  a positive step towards improving the labour  market participation of mothers with young  children. The adoption of the Civil Service Act  also represents some progress on the  recommendation to improve public administration.  The country report also reveals challenges  stemming from the analysis, notably:   ¥ Completing the income convergence process  vis-ˆ-vis the EU can only be achieved by  increasing the potential of the economy,  primarily by fostering knowledge-based  growth. Maintaining the pace of this  convergence is made more difficult by the fact  that income levels in the Czech Republic are  already high in comparison to regional peers.  Improvements in educational outcomes and  increased investment in R&D in recent years  suggest that the Czech Republic has started to  exploit its potential in human capital. However,  investment in both of these sectors is still  below the EU average and indicators suggest  