EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 



As economic growth accelerated significantly in 
2017, the Czech Republic is in a good position 
to address remaining structural challenges. 
Economic convergence has resumed and is likely 
to continue, while the current unemployment rate 
is the lowest recorded in any EU Member State 
since 2002. However, rising labour supply 
shortages, long-term fiscal sustainability pressures, 
regulatory and administrative burdens, and low 
public investment in knowledge-intensive 
activities pose long-term challenges to the 
economy. Given the country's highly favourable 
economic situation, appropriate policies could 
sustainably raise the Czech economy's growth 
potential and make growth more inclusive. (1) 

(1) This report assesses the Czech Republic’s economy in the 
light of the European Commission’s Annual Growth 
Survey published on 22 November 2017. In the survey, the 
Commission calls on EU Member States to implement 
reforms to make the European economy more productive, 
resilient and inclusive. In so doing, Member States should 
focus their efforts on the three elements of the virtuous 
triangle of economic policy — boosting investment, 
pursuing structural reforms and ensuring responsible fiscal 
policies. 

The Czech Republic is enjoying an economic 
upswing. Real GDP is expected to have increased 
by 4.5 % in 2017 and to grow by around 3 % in 
both 2018 and 2019, according to the Commission 
Winter 2018 forecast. Boosted by consumer 
confidence, increasing wages and low credit costs, 
private consumption growth remained high. After 
plunging in 2016, investment is expected to have 
bounced back in 2017, supported by the private 
sector and the renewed drawdown of EU funds. 
Foreign direct investment (FDI) is highly 
productive, supporting over a quarter of all private 
sector jobs and more than three quarters of all 
exports. On the other hand, investment in 
infrastructure continues to remain below the EU 
average. 

Labour market indicators set new records but 
at the same time signal limits to future growth. 
With an increasing level of employment 
approaching 80 % and an unemployment rate of 
2.5 % in the fourth quarter of 2017, the country is 
facing a tightened labour market and increased 
labour shortages. Consequently, due to limited 
scope for a further increase in labour participation 
and demographic constraints, employment gains 
are likely to stall from 2018 onwards. Due to a low 
ratio of jobseekers per vacancy, the tightened 

labour market will continue to spur wage growth 
acceleration in 2018 and 2019, albeit more slowly, 
allowing private consumption to remain robust. 

Inflation has moved above the central bank’s 
2.0 % target. The inflation rate reached 2.4 % in 
2017, rising significantly from 0.6 % in 2016. 
Meanwhile, the appreciation of the koruna 
following the decision of the Czech National Bank 
(CNB) to remove the exchange rate floor against 
the euro is tempering inflationary pressures, 
especially for imported goods and services. In 
2018 and 2019 the inflation rate is expected to 
moderate and stabilise around the 2 % target. 

The Czech Republic has made some progress in 
addressing the 2017 country-specific 
recommendations (CSRs). It has made limited 
progress in addressing the long-term sustainability 
of public finances. Some progress has been made 
in improving the anti-corruption and public 
procurement frameworks and in streamlining 
procedures for granting building permits. The 
range of e-government services has expanded and 
the quality of R&D has slightly improved. Some 
progress has also been observed in fostering 
employment of under-represented groups. 

The Czech Republic has either reached, or is on 
track to reach, its Europe 2020 targets in most 
areas. These include poverty or social exclusion, 
employment, renewable energy, greenhouse gas 
emissions and tertiary education. More action is 
needed to reduce the increasing early school 
leaving rate, improve energy efficiency and reach 
the R&D target. 

The Czech Republic performs relatively well on 
the indicators of the Social Scoreboard 
supporting the European Pillar of Social Rights, 
while challenges remain. The labour market is 
strong, yet the low participation in employment of 
women with small children and of vulnerable 
groups remains a challenge. At the same time, the 
Czech Republic has very low income inequality 
and a very low share of people at risk of poverty or 
social exclusion. 

Key structural issues analysed in this report, which 
point to particular challenges for the Czech 
Republic’s economy, are the following: 


. The increasing complexity of the tax system 
is a concern. Tax collection has improved, but 
the frequency of changes and higher 
compliance costs are worrisome for businesses. 
Reform of income tax legislation is still 
ongoing. The tax-wedge on labour remains 
high for low-income single earners. 
. Long-term fiscal sustainability worsened 
and age-related expenditures are causes for 
concern. While the short- and medium-term 
fiscal outlook appears sound, the expected raise 
in pension expenditures and the limited cost-
effectiveness of the healthcare sector are long-
term risks. The independent fiscal council is 
not yet operational and the coordination of 
fiscal and budgetary policies among the various 
government bodies remains a weakness. 
. Housing prices are increasing rapidly 
against a backdrop of high demand, 
constrained supply and regulatory obstacles. 
Since 2013 housing prices have increased 
faster than nominal income, especially in 
Prague. Although the government tries to 
streamline the procedures, building regulations 
continue to put pressure on the housing supply, 
contributing to the price rises. The market has 
become one of the fastest-growing in the EU, 
keeping credit growth strong. The central bank 
has limited tools for ensuring stability, but 
there are ongoing discussions about imposing 
binding lending limits. 
. Certain regulatory and administrative 
burdens are deterring further investment. 
Pending issues related to building permit 
procedures for households were in part 
addressed by the amendment of the 
Construction Act. Payment practices worsened 
in 2017 and the costs of resolving insolvencies 
remain above the EU average. A slower start of 
the 2014-2020 ESI Funds programming period 
and certain implementation problems resulted 
in a low absorption of EU funds, notably in 
areas such as energy efficiency or broadband 
infrastructure. 
. Steps were taken to improve the public 
procurement framework and the anti-
corruption agenda. Tailored training schemes 
and initiatives to increase transparency have 
aimed to improve procurement practices. While 
setting up joint procurement procedures 
remains a major challenge, corruption is an 
ongoing concern that has a negative impact on 
the business environment. Various reforms 
have been adopted, but the anti-corruption 
agenda has not been fully completed yet. 
. Despite high demand for labour, certain 
groups continue to be under-represented in 
the labour market. Gender inequalities in 
terms of pay and employment remain high 
despite recent measures that have made 
parental leave more flexible and increased the 
number of childcare facilities. Labour market 
participation for low-skilled and disabled 
people remains low. Despite having one of the 
lowest proportions of people at risk of poverty 
overall, a number of localities face an 
increasing number of socially excluded people, 
growing indebtedness and housing exclusion. 
. The attractiveness of the teaching profession 
remains low in spite of recent salary 
increases. Education performance continues to 
be strongly affected by the socioeconomic 
background of students. Inclusive education 
measures still need to be fully implemented, in 
particular for Roma children. The low early 
school leaving rate has risen, contrary to the 
EU trend. On the other hand, the tertiary 
education attainment continues to increase. 
. Whilst the Czech economy continues its shift 
towards more knowledge-intensive activities, 
several bottlenecks still hamper the R&D 
system. These include emerging shortages of 
skilled human resources, the low level of 
public-private cooperation and the relatively 
low performance of the public science base. 
While foreign R&D funding is trending 
upwards, domestic firms reduced their R&D 
spending. 
. E-government services are being enhanced, 
but remain below EU average. Several 
initiatives adopted aimed to enable secure 
access to e-government services. A national 
electronic identity card and other digital 
initiatives are planned to be introduced in 2018. 



