EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 



Denmark’s ongoing recovery offers a window of 
opportunity to ensure sustainable economic 
growth. In the current environment where capacity 
constraints are becoming increasingly binding, 
boosting investment, productivity growth and 
labour supply remain key challenges. Although the 
government has adopted several measures in recent 
years, further initiatives are needed to meet the 
targets set in its announced 2025 reform agenda. 
Risks are building up in the housing market amid 
emerging signs of housing price overvaluation. 
Reinforcing macroprudential policies and lowering 
the vulnerabilities associated with high household 
debt would bolster the financial system and reduce 
potential negative spill-overs to the broader 
economy. (1) 

(1) This report assesses Denmark’s economy in the light of the 
European Commission’s Annual Growth Survey published 
on 22 November 2017. In the survey, the Commission calls 
on EU Member States to implement reforms to make the 
European economy more productive, resilient and 
inclusive. In so doing, Member States should focus their 
efforts on the three elements of the virtuous triangle of 
economic policy — boosting investment, pursuing 
structural reforms and ensuring responsible fiscal policies. 

The Danish economy is expected to have grown 
in 2017 at its fastest pace in a decade, with real 
GDP expanding by 2.1 %. Danish GDP returned 
to its pre-crisis level in 2014 and the economy has 
since gathered further strength. Consumer price 
inflation remains low, but has picked up mainly 
due to moderate increases in energy and core 
inflation. Employment growth has been robust 
since 2012, particularly in services sectors, lifting 
the employment rate to pre-crisis levels (77.4 % in 
2016) and reducing unemployment. After 
stabilisation in 2016, unemployment fell to 5.8 % 
in 2017. 

Investment has gradually risen to levels close to 
its long-term average as a share of GDP. Public 
investment supported economic activity during the 
crisis, increasing significantly from 3 % of GDP in 
2008 to around 4 % in 2012. Since then, it has 
remained broadly stable. Corporate investment 
increased particularly between 2010 and 2014, 
driven mainly by larger firms, while investment by 
smaller companies remained subdued. In recent 
years, residential investment has become the main 
driver of investment growth, boosted by rapidly 
increasing housing prices. 

At an expected 8.4 % of GDP in 2017, the 
current account surplus has receded slightly 
from its peak of 9.5 % at the beginning of 2015. 
Greater participation in global value chains and 
higher investment abroad have boosted Danish 
companies’ export performance, despite some 
losses of export market share in recent years. The 
trade balance is expected to have reached 7.2 % of 
GDP, boosted by merchanting and goods 
processed and sold abroad. The net international 
investment position of 53 % of GDP continues to 
generate sizeable income flows. 

GDP growth is projected to remain solid, 
broad-based and above potential growth 
estimates. Private consumption, investment and 
exports are expected to remain the key drivers of 
economic growth. As a result, employment should 
increase further, although emerging skill shortages 
in specific sectors might hold back growth. Robust 
export growth is projected to limit losses of export 
market shares and support a high current account 
surplus. 

The headline fiscal balance is expected to 
remain broadly constant at -1 % of GDP in 
2018 and 2019. It is weighed down by temporary 
transfers to households, including reforms of the 
voluntary early retirement scheme in 2018 and the 
repayment of the overcharged property taxes in 
2019. Primary surpluses, combined with solid 
GDP growth have put public debt on a downward 
trajectory. 

In its medium term plan Growth and Prosperity 
2025, the three-party minority government has 
set out a reform programme for the coming 
years (Ministry of Finance, 2017d). Since its 
formation in November 2016, the government has 
launched initiatives to boost labour supply, 
improve the business environment and increase 
productivity. The 2025 plan sets out reforms 
targeting a 4 % medium-term increase in GDP. 
Reforms adopted to safeguard financial stability 
include amortisation requirements for highly 
indebted households. 

Denmark has made limited progress in 
addressing the 2017 country-specific 
recommendation. At a sector-specific level, some 
progress was made on easing restrictions for retail 
establishment and on increasing competition in the 
transport and construction sectors. However, none 


or limited progress was made in other domestically 
oriented services sectors where competition 
remains weak, leading to limited progress in 
addressing the 2017 country-specific 
recommendation. 

Regarding progress in reaching the national 
targets under the Europe 2020 strategy, 
Denmark has reached or is making good 
progress towards them. This applies to 
employment, R&D, greenhouse gas emissions, 
renewable energy, early school leaving, tertiary 
education and energy efficiency. It may, however, 
face challenges in achieving its target on reducing 
the number of people at risk of poverty or social 
exclusion. 

Denmark performs well on the indicators of the 
Social Scoreboard supporting the European 
Pillar of Social Rights. Employments rates are 
high and increasing social protection schemes are 
advanced. These developments reflect its advanced 
welfare model, including effective active labour 
market policies, strong social dialogue and a 
dynamic labour market. 

Key structural issues analysed in this report, which 
point to particular challenges for Denmark's 
economy, are the following: 

. While productivity in the Danish economy 
remains among the highest in the EU, 
productivity growth has been falling for 
decades, similarly to other EU Member 
States. In its first report in December 2017, the 
Productivity Board pointed to a broad range of 
possible impediments to productivity growth. 
These include weak competition in 
domestically oriented services sectors. 
. Competition in domestically oriented 
services sectors is still weak, although the 
government took measures to stimulate 
productivity and investment. In the course of 
2017, Parliament adopted measures to ease 
retail planning restrictions and increase 
competition in the taxi sector. A new building 
regulation entered into force on 1 January 2018 
and will simplify building procedures. While 
domestic standards have been aligned with 
international standards in some construction 
sectors, they still hamper competition in others. 
In past years, weak competition has led to 
higher consumer prices (e.g. in retail, finance, 
distribution of utilities and network industries, 
and wholesale of pharmaceuticals) even after 
adjusting for purchasing power. 
. Following several years of substantial 
housing price increases, overvaluation risks 
are emerging, particularly in the main 
urban areas. The prices are driven to a large 
extent by income growth and demographic 
change and fuelled by very low interest rates 
and the nominal freeze of property taxes. 
Although housing construction has been robust, 
population growth has been outpacing housing 
stock increase in the major urban areas. 
Housing prices have grown more strongly than 
these factors warrant and there are 
consequently signs of overvaluation in the 
housing market, particularly in the main urban 
areas. A reform agreed in May 2017 will re-
align property taxes with actual property 
values, putting an end to the pro-cyclical 
property tax regime from 2021. 
. Despite continued efforts to reduce debt, 
Danish households’ debt ranks among the 
highest in the EU. Although households 
continued to reduce their debt in 2017, debt 
levels remain above what is warranted by 
economic fundamentals and prudential 
thresholds according to European Commission 
estimates. Moreover, the proportion of 
mortgage loans with very high loan-to-income 
levels and variable interest rate loans has been 
increasing strongly since 2013, particularly in 
and around Copenhagen. The combination of 
high debt with high interest rate sensitivity and 
potentially overvalued housing prices is 
increasing the risk of a price correction that 
could hurt the real economy and the banking 
sector. Although the Danish authorities have 
adopted new macro-prudential measures to 
further restrict risky loan-taking, high 
household debt continues to pose risks to 
economic stability. 
. Shortages of skilled labour in certain sectors 
constitute a significant challenge. Recent 
active labour market and education policy 
reforms are geared to addressing this issue. The 
overall aim is to improve the quality and 



attractiveness of vocational education and 
training (VET) and ensure that workers have 
the right composition of skills to meet demand. 
Nonetheless, only 18.5 % of Danish students 
embarked on VET programmes. This is below 
the 2025 target under the national VET reform 
(2015), which sees 30 % of each cohort taking 
up VET directly after compulsory schooling. 
. Despite increased economic activity and 
declining unemployment, some segments of 
the population remain on the margin of the 
labour market. This applies in particular to 
people with a migrant background (especially 
those from outside the EU), young people not 
in employment, education or training, and 
people with reduced work capacity and 
disabilities. Recent reforms of active labour 
market policies involve more individual 
support for the unemployed and the vulnerable, 
combined with stronger economic incentives to 
work. 
. Various policy measures have been taken to 
help newly arrived refugees find work. The 
focus is on early intervention and assessing 
individuals’ skills. Initial results are positive, 
with employment among refugees increasing 
by 15 percentage points between 2015 and 
2017. The two-year ‘basic integration 
education’ (IGU) programme, which got off to 
a slow start, appears to be catching up. 
. The savings-investment surplus in Denmark 
reflects to a large extent high corporate 
savings rather than low investment. The 
savings rate of companies has remained high, 
despite a return of their investment levels to the 
pre-crisis average. Although aggregate business 
investment has normalised, investment by 
smaller companies remains subdued. Financing 
conditions have improved, although access to 
finance remains relatively difficult for 
start-ups, small companies and those without 
mortgage collateral. Government measures to 
improve access to finance include initiatives to 
foster entrepreneurship and strengthen equity 
financing for smaller companies. 


 


