EXECUTIVE SUMMARY After five years of slow recovery, the Danish economy seems to be picking up. In 2014, growth and employment in Denmark were affected by the generally slow recovery in the EU and weak domestic demand. GDP growth is expected to pick-up, reaching a growth rate of 1.7% in 2015 and 2.1% in 2016. According to the national accounts, employment reached a trough in mid.2013 and has since increased by 0.8%. The unemployment rate has been on a downward trend since mid-2012, stood at 6.4% by the end of 2014, and is projected to remain stable over the next two years. Inflation is currently very low, reaching an annual growth rate of -0.3% in January 2015. It is expected to improve slightly, as the effects of the fall in commodity prices lessen, and is expected to reach 0.4% in 2015 and 1.6% in 2016. The housing market is improving, but there are very marked regional differences with significant increases in house prices in the largest cities. Since Denmark is a small and open economy, its continued recovery is to a large extent dependent on the economic situation of its main trading partners. This Country Report assesses Denmark's economy against the background of the Commission's Annual Growth Survey, which recommends three main pillars for the EU's economic and social policy in 2015: investment, structural reforms, and fiscal responsibility. In line with the Investment Plan for Europe, it also explores ways to maximise the impact of public resources and unlock private investment. Finally, it provides an analysis of the Danish economy and reviews the policy response since mid-2014, notably as regards the Country-Specific Recommendations issued by the Council in 2014. The main observations and findings of the analysis are: Public finances are expected to remain sustainable over the medium-term. The European Commission winter 2015 forecast projects that the budget deficit will stay below 3% in 2015-16. The structural balance will be influenced by volatile revenue components during these years, which to some extent explains the projected fall in the structural balance from a surplus of 1.2% in 2014 to a deficit of 1.8% in 2015. The general government gross debt level is expected to decrease gradually from 45.1% of GDP in 2013 to 43.6% in 2016.  The labour market in Denmark is flexible and employment rates are high, but certain groups remain at the margins. Employment has been improving since mid–2013, and unemployment is expected to remain comparatively low and stable. However, several groups, in particular low-skilled young people and migrants from outside the EU, remain at the margins of the labour market. Recent policy measures, such as the reforms of social assistance, active labour market policies and unemployment benefits are important steps towards addressing this issue. The 2014 reform of active labour market policies is an important step designed to ensure better and more individualised support for unemployed people, more training and education incentives for unskilled workers, and better coordination of relations between the unemployed people and employment offices.  Denmark has the highest expenditure on education in the EU relative to GDP, but educational outcomes are average. The drop-out rates from upper secondary vocational training and education remain relatively high. Moreover, basic skills attainment levels in primary and lower secondary education are average in comparison with the rest of the EU, while apprenticeship places in tertiary education remain scarce. In addition, the basic skills of pupils with a migrant background, and their participation in pre–school education remain low. The recent reform of vocational education seems promising with regard to improving its effectiveness and attractiveness.  Danish productivity growth has been weak over the past two decades, and has been hampered by a lack of competition in the domestic services sector. Restrictions on entry and a generally high regulatory burden are particularly problematic for non-Danish companies. The government adopted a growth package in May 2014, comprising more than 100 measures to accelerate productivity growth. The implementation of these measures is still at an early stage. More generally, limited progress has been made in reducing barriers to entry and regulatory burden related to the planning law, establishment conditions for retailers, and construction authorisations. Boosting investment would help Denmark strengthen economic growth, increase productivity and improve competitiveness. Growth in private investment is expected on the Executive summary basis of a high savings surplus in the private sector and low interest rates. Furthermore, the analysis points to possible underinvestment in transport and energy infrastructure in Denmark since the early 2000s, in particular for road maintenance, rail investment and energy infrastructure. Denmark has an ambitious energy strategy, with a goal to cover the entire supply with renewable energy by 2050. The overall investment in energy in Denmark has increased since 2012, enabling improvements in connectivity and infrastructure, as well as capacity expansion. Further investment in electricity and gas networks could enhance the interconnection capacity with neighbouring countries. In the area or research and innovation, the transfer of research results from universities to innovation is weak. Denmark has made some progress in addressing the 2014 Country-Specific Recommendations. Some progress was made on improving the employability of the people at the margins of the labour market and facilitating their transition from education to the labour market. However, limited steps were taken to remove barriers to entry or to reduce the regulatory burden in order to increase competition in the domestic services sector, in particular in retail and construction. This Country Report also examines the policy challenges stemming from the analysis, as set out below: Inclusion of the groups at the margins of the labour market remains a challenge. The active labour market policy reform is primarily targeted at those who have recently been in employment and does not directly target those who are most excluded from the labour market. In addition, the labour market potential of people with a migrant background remains considerably under–utilised.  Drop-out rates from vocational education and training are still high and this type of education does not seem to be attractive enough for young people. This jeopardises sustainable transitions from education to the labour market. The vocational education and training reform adopted in June 2014, and the measures in the 2014 growth package to increase the number of apprenticeships have not yet been implemented. Barriers to entry and regulatory burden in the domestic services sector affect productivity growth. Strict rules and competition hampering legislation prevail, including in areas such as national standards, authorisations in the construction sector, and the planning law. The transfer from research to innovation also has an impact on productivity growth. The challenge of better translating the investment in public research into benefits for businesses and society has been recognised by the government, who recently published an evaluation report reflecting on how to enhance university-business collaboration and utilisation of university research. 