EXECUTIVE SUMMARY Despite the economic weakness of its main trading partners, Estonia’s economy has been markedly resilient. After a sharp contraction in 2008 and 2009, real GDP is expected to grow by around 2.6% per year in 2015-16, to regain its pre.crisis level by 2016 despite a decrease in transit activity. Estonia’s unemployment rate had almost quadrupled from 4.4 % in 2007 to 16.7 % in 2010, but has since fallen back to 7.6 % in 2014 and is forecast to fall even further, partly due to a shrinking working-age population. Public debt is expected to remain at below 10 % of GDP in the coming years. Inflation is currently very low, but excise and administrative price increases and strong wage growth are set to push it back to around 1.6% in 2016. This Country Report assesses Estonia's economy against the background of the Commission's Annual Growth Survey which recommends three main pillars for the EU's economic and social policy in 2015: investment, structural reforms, and fiscal responsibility. In line with the Investment Plan for Europe, it also explores ways to maximise the impact of public resources and unlock private investment. The main findings contained in this Country Report are: • As regards taxation, the tax categories that are least detrimental to growth appear underused, which leads to a partially inefficient use of labour and energy resources, especially as the tax wedge of low-income earners remains relatively high and energy efficiency remains low, including in transport. • Estonia’s working-age population and labour force is rapidly shrinking as a result of low birth rates, persistent emigration and health-related exits from the labour market. The latter are still increasing and partly related to the lack of jobs in specific regions and deficiencies in the current incapacity for work benefit scheme. Services at local government level still fall short in making active labour market policies effective and in addressing social challenges. • As regards investment in research and development, capital investment is mostly directed at construction and equipment, and is insufficiently at intellectual property products. The business sector is making progress in terms of increasing its research and development investment, but these investments are concentrated in a limited number of companies with insufficient levels of R&D results. Few companies collaborate with research institutions. Finally, long-term and structural unemployment remain relatively high in some regions where industrial activity is partly obsolete. • Estonia is unlikely to meet its energy efficiency target for 2020. In particular, energy intensity in buildings, heating systems and transport remains high. Also, although the quality of transport infrastructure has improved, good intermodal and international connections remain essential for competitiveness, especially as transit trade is important for the Estonian economy. In parallel, the prevention of waste generation and support for reuse and recycling are still insufficient. Finally, cross-border connections for gas and electricity remain key to Estonia’s energy security. Overall, Estonia has made some progress in addressing the country-specific recommendations issued by the Council in 2014. On issues relating to the labour market and social and education policy, some progress has been made to strengthen labour supply through various policies, notably the adoption of the work capacity reform, measures to improve incentives to work for low-income earners, and measures to increase the availability of childcare. The labour-market relevance of education and training systems has also been improved. As regards research, development and innovation, some work was carried out on intensifying prioritisation and specialisation of research and innovation systems, and on strengthening cooperation between businesses and academia. In the energy sector, some progress has been made to improve energy efficiency and security. There has been no progress on strengthening the budgetary framework and on better balancing local government revenue against devolved responsibilities. The Country Report also reveals the policy challenges stemming from the analysis, namely: Executive summary •  The current multiannual expenditure rules appear insufficiently binding to make Estonia’s fiscal framework fully resilient in case of recurring expenditure pressures and to reduce uncertainties in medium-term  bodes well for further positive developments in this area. In parallel, the low energy efficiency of the transport system remains a problem and the absence of charges for road infrastructure use may hamper the sustainable  planning. Moreover, in order to allocate resources more efficiently and to reduce a favourable tax treatment of housing, a more extensive use of these taxes is a possibility.  funding of infrastructure upgrades and much needed intermodal connections. Estonia’s resource efficiency falls similarly short when it comes to preventing and reducing waste generation and increasing reuse and recycling.  •  As regards strengthening labour supply, the tax wedge for low-income earners remains relatively high, especially because the threshold of tax-exemption from the personal income tax remains low for a country with a flat taxation system. Implementation of the work capacity reform  Finally, as regards cross-border connections, a number of major infrastructure developments in the electricity, gas and transport sectors are only in their incipient phase, which implies that effective links with the EU’s energy networks and Estonia’s energy security are still insufficient at this stage.  package and an overhaul of prevention  mechanisms will be crucial to reduce early  exits from the labour market. As in previous  years, the main challenges relate to improving  the effectiveness of employment measures and  the quality of social services at local level. In  parallel, several characteristics of the current  family policy framework prevent young parents  from swiftly re-entering the labour market and  contribute to a high gender pay gap. In the  education sector, the participation level in  vocational education and training and  apprenticeships remains insufficient. Finally,  despite a tertiary education attainment rate far  above the EU average, there is a clear shortage  of students in technology and science subjects.  •  As regards investment in research and development, there is progress on the availability of early-stage financing, but access by households and small and medium-sized companies to the equity market remains marginal. The swift  implementation of the updated innovation  voucher scheme, the Applied Research  Programme, the Enterprise Development  Programme, as well as the strategies and action  plans for the north-eastern and other regions  could lead to promising developments.  •  As regards infrastructure and energy efficiency, the government’s intention to provide district heating systems, households and building owners with incentives to reduce losses and invest in energy efficiency  