EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 



Estonia's strong economic growth and high 
employment offer a window of opportunity to 
pursue key reforms. Effective policies to address 
the risks associated with demographic decline and 
bottlenecks in Estonia's social protection system, 
as well as in research and innovation, would 
enable better use of resources, including of human 
capital thereby raising the country's growth 
potential.(1) 

(1) This report assesses Estonia’s economy in the light of the 
European Commission’s Annual Growth Survey published 
on 22 November 2017. In the survey, the Commission calls 
on EU Member States to implement structural reforms to 
make the European economy more productive, resilient and 
inclusive. In so doing, Member States should focus their 
efforts on the three elements of the virtuous triangle of 
economic policy — boosting investment, pursuing 
structural reforms and ensuring responsible fiscal policies. 

 

An improving external outlook and a recovery 
in investment boosted Estonia’s real GDP 
growth to above 4 % in 2017. Real GDP growth 
is forecast to settle at around 3 % in 2018-2019 
once the initial boost from the investment recovery 
passes. Exports and private consumption are 
expected to continue adding strongly to growth, 
although inflation and a tight labour market could 
weigh on their development. Estonia has loosened 
its fiscal policy, as new expenditure plans are not 
fully covered by revenue increases. In structural 
terms the deficit is expected to significantly 
increase to about 1.5 % of GDP in 2018 and 2019. 

Estonia's labour market has performed well, 
and employment and labour market 
participation have been high, but a falling 
labour supply imposes challenges. Backed by a 
favourable economic environment, unemployment 
has declined since 2010 and is currently among the 
lowest in the EU (6.8 % in 2016 and 6% in 2017). 
However, unemployment is expected to increase 
moderately in the coming years as the ‘Work 
Ability’ reform activates people with reduced 
ability for work who might not become employed 
immediately. In the medium term, the working-age 
population is projected to shrink considerably. As 
a result, the pressure on the cost of labour is 
expected to rise. Some challenges also arise from 
skills shortages. 

The poverty risk among the older people has 
increased, largely because pensions have not kept 
pace with economic growth. Pension adequacy is 

likely to become a bigger problem due to rising 
dependency ratios. Long-term care needs and costs 
are fuelled by the rapid ageing of the population. 

Productivity growth in Estonia has picked up 
recently, but not to the extent seen before the 
crisis. Labour productivity growth has halved 
compared to pre-crisis growth rates and lags 
behind the wage growth. The gap between labour 
productivity and wages narrowed in the first half 
of 2017 as the growth in productivity became 
faster and exceeded that in real wages for the first 
time in several years. At the same time, the overall 
slowdown in investment rates to the EU average 
levels suggests that the fast catching up phase may 
be over. Going forward, the challenge will be to 
use the scarce resources more productively to 
maintain the country’s growth model. However, 
weak performance in innovation and low private 
research and development investment give rise to 
concerns about the economy’s ability to expand 
the proportion of knowledge-intensive activities. 

Estonia has made some progress in addressing 
the 2017 country-specific recommendations. 
There has been some progress with making the 
social safety net more adequate and some progress 
reducing the gender pay gap, but more time is 
needed to see the impact of taken measures. 
Estonia has made some progress in promoting 
private investment in research and development, 
and in stepping up cooperation between academia 
and business. 

Regarding its national targets under the Europe 
2020 strategy, Estonia met its employment rate 
target of 76% and also its tertiary education target 
already in 2015. It is also performing well on 
renewable energy, energy efficiency and reducing 
greenhouse gas emissions. However, there is 
underperformance on reducing early school 
leaving, and on meeting the national targets for 
reducing poverty and R&D expenditure. 

Estonia performs relatively well on a number of 
the indicators of the Social Scoreboard 
supporting the European Pillar of Social Rights, 
while challenges remain. Estonia's labour market 
is performing well notwithstanding that the 
coverage of unemployed people by active labour 
market policies appears to be low. A high level of 
unmet need for medical care is reported. Social 
protection and inclusion is undermined by the 


relatively low effectiveness of social transfers in 
reducing poverty. This has implications also for 
income inequality, which remains relatively high, 
despite recent improvements. 

The main findings of the analysis contained in this 
report, and the related policy challenges, are as 
follows: 

. Providing a more adequate social safety net 
supported by better service provision 
remains a major challenge for Estonia. Tax-
cutting measures are creating employment 
incentives for the low income earners but will 
not significantly alleviate the inequality. Steps 
are being taken to provide more adequate 
pensions, subsistence allowances, and higher 
family allowances, yet an increasing share of 
the population is at risk-of-poverty. The areas 
with the most inadequate financing are 
pensions, disability benefits and long-term care 
services. The ongoing administrative reform 
could improve the delivery of high-quality 
services. 
. Estonia faces challenges in relation to 
occupational health and access to 
healthcare. The state of health of the working 
population suggests that working conditions do 
not entirely enable people to lead longer 
healthy working lives. Access to healthcare due 
to waiting times for specialised medical care 
remains a challenge. Measures are being taken 
and reforms are considered to improve the 
situation; however, their impact will require 
time to materialise. 
. The gender pay gap remains one of the 
highest in the EU despite some measures. 
The parental leave and benefits system will be 
made more flexible and will provide one month 
of leave exclusively for fathers. This is 
expected to shorten women's long career breaks 
that contribute to the gender pay gap. The 
planned legislation to improve wage 
transparency would only apply to public sector 
entities. These measures appear to be steps into 
the right direction but their effectiveness 
remains to be seen. 
. Estonia is generally performing well on 
education and training, but a number of 
challenges remain. Students possess a good 
level of basic skills and tertiary educational 
attainment is above the EU average. But the 
early school leaving rate remains high. Drop-
out among first-year students of upper 
secondary vocational education and training is 
particularly high. Although participation in 
adult learning is rapidly increasing, it is rather 
limited among the low-skilled. The appeal of 
and interest in obtaining a PhD degree is rather 
limited but this may change as PhD allowances 
have been increased. Measures are underway to 
address the high drop-out rates in higher 
education. 
. In order to sustain growth without losing 
competitiveness, Estonia's challenge is to 
have a sufficient productivity growth. In the 
medium term, convergence of domestic wages 
with those of higher-wage countries together 
with falling labour supply appears to be the 
main drivers of wage growth. While the risks 
of competitiveness losses have been contained 
so far, the lack of effective measures to 
increase labour productivity puts at risk the 
prospect of further income convergence 
towards the EU average. 
. Estonia’s weak productivity growth can be 
linked to its moderate performance on R&D 
and innovation. While the economy has some 
high value-added and knowledge-intensive 
activities, private R&D intensity, science-
business links, and innovation and 
technological capacity of companies remain 
low, weakening Estonia's productivity. Public 
sector expenditure on R&D has been 
traditionally above the EU average, however 
insufficient prioritisation of public R&D 
remains a challenge. Broader focus on the role 
of the human capital and skills in fostering 
innovation can be key to expanding Estonia’s 
growth capacity since other enabling 
framework conditions, including business 
environment and e-government perform well. 
However, lengthy and inefficient insolvency 
procedures remain an obstacle to investment. 



