EXECUTIVE SUMMARY Structural adjustments still weigh on FinlandÕs economic performance, but a slow recovery is taking hold. After contracting for two consecutive years, FinlandÕs output stabilised in 2014. An increase in net exports helped to soften the negative impact of a further large decline in investments. Consumption was held back by declining employment, low wage growth and tax increases. However, economic growth gained momentum in the second half of the year and the recovery is expected to continue in 2015 and 2016. Several factors support this expectation. First, the shakeout in the electronic and paper sectors seems to have run its course. Second, with the conclusion, in 2013, of a moderate wage agreement, Finnish wage developments have moved, albeit belatedly, into line with the new post-crisis reality, supporting the restoration of cost competitiveness. Third, a gradual improvement in external demand, together with the decline in imported fuel prices and the exchange rate, should support exports. Finally, credit conditions remain supportive of an increase in economic activity. On the other hand, weak labour market conditions and wage moderation will continue weighing down on private consumption. This Country Report assesses FinlandÕs economy against the background of the CommissionÕs Annual Growth Survey which recommends three main pillars for the EUÕs economic and social policy in 2015: investment, structural reforms and fiscal responsibility. In line with the Investment Plan for Europe, it also explores ways to maximise the impact of public resources and unlock private investment. Finally, it assesses Finland in the light of the findings of the 2015 Alert Mechanism Report, in which the Commission found it useful to further examine the persistence of imbalances or their unwinding. The main findings of the in-depth review contained in this country report are: ¥ Following a steady deterioration from 2003 until 2011, the Finnish current account has stabilised at a small deficit. The goods balance is expected to have turned back into surplus in 2014 and is projected to improve further in the coming years. FinlandÕs net international investment position deteriorated in 2014, but remains in positive territory. In addition, while the economy remains exposed to asymmetric shocks, its vulnerability to external developments has decreased. Overall, FinlandÕs external sustainability is not a concern. ¥ The rapid decline of some manufacturing industries (electronics and forest) has largely ended. The impact of the collapse of the electronics and paper industries on GDP and exports has not yet been overcome. GDP remains below its pre-crisis level and potential growth has declined. Yet, there are signs that the process of economic restructuring has started, albeit very gradually. The information and communication-technologies service industry and professional and other support services to the private sector, have been clearly expanding for over a decade. In manufacturing, the chemical industry especially has been growing steadily over recent years. In addition, new investments in the hard-hit electronics and paper industries should support the launch of new products. The rate of start-ups is low in comparison with other peer economies. This does not favour the dispersion and spillover of FinlandÕs high innovation potential. ¥ The productivity of Finnish companies is in line with its Nordic peers and recently the growth in labour productivity started to accelerate. Cost competitiveness deteriorated in 2008-12, partly due to the decline in high.productivity industries and partly due to wage rises above productivity growth, with other domestic costs also increasing. More recently, both wage moderation and productivity growth have started to gradually improve cost competitiveness relative to competitor countries. ¥ While public investment is relatively high, private investment is low. Private-sector incentives to invest into new machinery and equipment have diminished by relatively rapid growth of wages and other production costs. Low equipment investment can reduce Finland's competitiveness and growth potential. However, relative cost competitiveness has started to improve gradually and consequently investments are assumed to gradually recover in the coming years.  Executive summary ¥ Private-sector debt does not appear to be a source of immediate concern, but it needs to be closely monitored. Private-sector debt has stabilised at a level just above the EU average. However, there appear to be no urgent deleveraging pressures, given the sound financial sector and low debt-servicing costs. The increase in house prices seems to have stopped, lowering the probability that household debt will increase in the near future. The country report also analyses other macroeconomic and structural issues and the main findings are: ¥ FinlandÕs debt-to-GDP ratio is on a rising trend and will exceed 60% in 2015. Ageing.related costs imply risks for the sustainability of public finances in the medium to long term. Finland has limited room to increase tax revenues, as the tax ratio is already high. However, the efficiency of the public sector can be improved further, particularly in areas that face cost-pressures in the future from ageing Ñ mainly healthcare and long-term care. ¥ Recent labour market performance has been weak, but still compares favourably with the EU-average. Unemployment has been increasing. Early exit from the labour market occurs mainly through disability or through the extended unemployment benefits available for older workers. ¥ The Finnish retail sector remains highly concentrated, being dominated by two local retail groups. The dominance is strengthened by planning rules and strict regulation on large.scale outlets. The regulations have a negative impact on productivity growth and constitute market entry and market expansion barriers for new operators. Overall, Finland has made some progress in addressing the 2014 country-specific recommendations. An important development is the agreement reached between the social partners regarding implementation of the pension reform from 2017. In addition, reforms of the social and healthcare sectors have been initiated to better control expenditure growth in these areas. Some steps to increase the growth-friendliness of the tax system have been taken. Other positive action, such as measures to improve employment of the elderly, has been taken in the labour market. The government took new measures to diversify the economy, notably though the promotion of innovation and investment in digitalisation, biotechnology and clean technologies. Furthermore, public support focuses on promoting exports of SMEs and on risk capital. Some recommendations have not been fully addressed. For instance, while the new bill amending the land use and building act incorporates competition as an objective, the restrictions regarding large-scale outlets have not been addressed. This country report reveals the policy challenges stemming from the analysis of macro-economic imbalances, namely: ¥ Earlier losses to cost competitiveness would recover further if careful control of the development of costs continued in the future. Over recent years, cost pressures in the non.tradable sector have had a negative impact on cost competitiveness. ¥ Despite a business environment that has many strong points, Finland is missing out on some opportunities to improve its non.cost competitiveness. Finnish enterprises, including start-ups, tend to remain small and do not actively seek to grow or internationalise. There is room to improve the capacity of universities in turning research into innovations. ¥ Households faced a relatively quick increase in their debt burden. Household debt mainly takes the form of mortgage debt. Recent declines in interest rates have reduced the burden of servicing the debt, but also reduced the incentives to deleverage. Further macro.prudential measures could help to stem a further increase in household indebtedness. In addition, other policy challenges are ensuring the sustainability of public finances in view of pressures from ageing-related costs and, linked to this, using better the full potential of the labour market. 