EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 



The positive economic outlook paves the way 
for further reforms which could lift Finland's 
growth potential and improve resilience. 
Economic activity is expanding owing to external 
demand and improved cost competitiveness as well 
as increasing investment. Despite the recently 
adopted measures, the recovery in the labour 
market could be hampered by skills shortages and 
low labour market participation. A higher 
employment rate and cost efficient public services 
are key issues to securing the long-run 
sustainability of public finances and the welfare 
system. Addressing these challenges would 
improve the resilience of the economy. (1) 

(1) This report assesses Finland’s economy in the light of the 
Commission’s 2018 Annual Growth Survey published on 
22 November 2017. In the Survey, the Commission calls 
on EU Member States to implement structural reforms to 
make the European economy more productive, resilient and 
inclusive. In so doing, Member States should focus their 
efforts on the three elements of the virtuous triangle of 
economic policy — boosting investment, pursuing 
structural reforms and ensuring responsible fiscal policies. 

Finland is emerging from a protracted crisis. 
The country exited from economic recession in 
2016 as real GDP expanded robustly and in 2017 
economic activity is expected to have increased 
even more. In 2016, the expansion was quick-
started by increasing investment, initially 
construction, supported by cheap borrowing for 
households and recovering profits for enterprises. 
In 2017, higher demand from abroad led to a 
vibrant revival in exports and strong equipment 
investment. The current account was moving close 
to balance and is set to reach positive territory this 
year. After a long stagnation, labour productivity 
started to improve, while enterprises consolidated 
profits. At the same time, labour participation 
increased, and unemployment declined only 
modestly. 

Despite the recent upturn, the economy is still 
affected by the legacy of the double-dip 
recession. Overall economic activity is poised to 
pass its previous peak level of 2008 only in 2018 
— four years after the EU as a whole. Employment 
is still below pre-crisis levels, while 
unemployment is still higher. Labour productivity 
declined in Finland between 2008 and 2016, while 
in the EU as a whole it increased. The volume of 
Finland's exports of goods and services was 10% 
lower than in 2008, while total EU exports 
increased by a quarter in the same period. Potential 

growth has recently accelerated but is not expected 
to return to pre-crisis growth rates in the medium 
term. 

Equipment investment has picked up, but 
investment in R&D and intangible assets is 
lagging behind. Equipment investment rebounded 
in early 2017, as capacity utilisation increased, 
supported by the recovery in external demand, but 
remained one of the lowest in the EU as a share of 
GDP. After several years of decline, investment in 
R&D and intangible assets was close to the EU 
average, but, in 2017, started expanding again. The 
electronics sector is expected to record positive 
operating results for the first time since the start of 
the recession, creating scope for new investment in 
intangible assets. Finland’s stock of inward FDI 
remains low among the EU Member States, but 
recent developments in greenfield investment are 
encouraging and the business environment is 
generally good. 

Finland's cost competitiveness is recovering, but 
non-cost competitiveness is a concern. In the late 
2000s, cost competitiveness deteriorated as a result 
of high wage increases. Cost competitiveness 
relative to the rest of the euro area has improved 
since 2016, thanks to the Competitiveness Pact 
agreed in tripartite social dialogue. The wage deals 
which have been concluded for the next two years 
are quite moderate. With respect to non-cost 
competitiveness, Finland experienced a shift in 
specialisation from higher value added goods 
towards intermediate goods after the setback of its 
electronics sector. Exports of services have 
become increasingly high-tech and are expanding. 

The labour market is gradually recovering. 
More people have moved into the labour force, as 
confidence about the economy increased. 
However, this has not yet translated into strong 
employment growth. Structural unemployment 
remains high, which could reflect low incentives to 
accept work, lack of targeted and sufficient 
activation measures, skills shortages and lack of 
affordable housing in the growth centres. 
However, on the back of the positive economic 
outlook and reforms implemented recently, 
employment growth is expected to accelerate in 
2018. 

The overall private debt burden is unwinding 
and the public sector has started to reduce its 


debt. Owing to continued consolidation efforts, the 
public deficit is expected to remain below 3 % of 
GDP in the near future. After a peak at 63.6 % of 
GDP in 2015, the gross public debt ratio has been 
on a decreasing path and is expected to fall below 
62 % of GDP in 2019. The ratio of the private debt 
stock to GDP decreased in 2016. However, unlike 
the non-financial corporations' debt, the household 
debt has been moderately on the rise and the 
household saving rate is expected to remain 
exceptionally low. The Finnish Financial 
Supervisory Authority has adopted measures to 
contain the high indebtedness of households. 

The banking sector remains sound overall, but 
structural weaknesses persist. Finnish lenders 
remain profitable, well capitalised and have a high 
loss absorption capacity. However, the risk weight 
for mortgages in capital ratios calculation was 
fairly low. Also, banks rely heavily on wholesale 
funding. The Finnish Financial Supervisory 
Authority has recently targeted these risks. The 
Parliament has strengthened macro-prudential 
supervision also by adding a Systemic Risk Buffer 
to the existing toolkit. Nevertheless, the banking 
sector remains rather concentrated and refinancing 
risks persist. 

Overall, Finland has made some (2) progress in 
addressing the 2017 country-specific 
recommendations. Recent measures to reform 
unemployment benefits have already resulted in 
greater incentives to accept work, though 
challenges persist. Action has also been taken to 
facilitate (self-) employment and regional mobility. 
Wage negotiations for 2018 and beyond are 
ongoing and so far the outcomes are in line with 
productivity developments. The bill for social and 
healthcare services reform is expected to be 
approved by Parliament in spring 2018 so that the 
reform would enter into force in 2020. 
Furthermore, Finland has also made progress in 
other areas covered by the 2017 recommendations, 
including on reducing the administrative burden; 
improving the regulatory framework; increasing 
competition in services; and promoting investment. 

(2) Information on the level of progress and actions taken to 
address the policy advice in each respective subpart of a 
CSR is presented in the overview table in the Annex. 

As for progress in reaching the national targets 
under the Europe 2020 strategy, developments in 

2017 were generally positive. Regarding the 
employment rate of 20-64 year-olds, Finland’s 
goal is 78 % while in 2016 the rate stood at 74 %, 
improving from previous years. The poverty rate is 
low compared to the EU average and has been 
gradually decreasing recently. The early school 
leaving rate fell slightly below the target of 8 % for 
the first time in 2016 while Finland’s tertiary 
educational attainment rate stayed above the target. 
The very ambitious R&D investment target of 4 % 
of GDP is likely to be missed, as R&D investment 
has decreased in recent years, standing at 2.8 % in 
2016. Finland is broadly on track to reach its 
climate and energy targets. 

Finland performs relatively well on the 
indicators of the Social Scoreboard supporting 
the European Pillar of Social Rights. Finland 
displays low levels of income inequality and few 
people at risk of poverty or social exclusion. It is 
recognised for its high quality and inclusive 
education system. A reform of the social and 
health care system is being prepared. This reform 
could have the potential to address the high self-
declared unmet need for medical care. 

The main findings of the analysis in this report, 
and the related policy challenges, are as follows: 

. The public debt-to-GDP ratio is projected to 
start increasing again in the early 2020s. The 
age-related healthcare and long-term care 
services expenditure are expected to expand 
with a knock-on effect on public finances. An 
overhaul of the services accompanied by a 
reform of the local and regional administration, 
currently in the Parliament, is yet to be 
adopted. The reform aims at increasing the role 
of the private sector in the provision of social 
and healthcare services. Cost savings are 
expected through increased competition and 
better integrated service provision. The reform 
has the potential to increase productivity of 
social and healthcare services and therefore 
lower the expenditure pressure. However, 
despite the planned savings, the cost pressure 
from population ageing keeps medium-term 
debt projections on an increasing path. 
. Despite a recent increase, the employment 
rate at 69.7% of 15-64 year-olds remains low 
when compared to Finland's Nordic peers. 



For some unemployed or people outside the 
labour force, particularly among those aged 25-
49, taking up work is still not financially 
rewarding enough despite the action already 
taken. The efficiency of some of the activation 
measures are hampered by a lack of service 
integration. Another challenge is to ensure the 
long-term integration of refugees and other 
migrants in the Finnish labour market and 
society. 
. Wage setting practices are changing, and it 
is not yet known how the new model will 
keep wages and productivity aligned. 
Cumulated losses of cost competitiveness have 
almost been compensated following years of 
wage moderation. Wage setting appears to 
move away from the centralised agreements 
made in 2013 and 2016 towards sectoral and 
local level bargaining. It has given some first 
positive results. Under the latest wage 
agreements, organized employers have more 
opportunities to carry out local bargaining 
while for non-organised employers some 
obstacles persist. However, it is yet to be seen 
whether a coordinated model will emerge, 
whereby the non-tradable sector follows the 
tradable one in keeping wages aligned with 
productivity and thus ensuring cost 
competitiveness as well as optimal employment 
outcomes. 
. The debt level of households remains high 
and rising. Gross household saving rates are at 
half the level prevailing in the euro area as a 
whole and active debt reduction is not taking 
place. Several measures have been introduced 
to strengthen the stability of the financial sector 
and promote sustainable household lending. 
Despite the measures, and amid low interest 
rates, a significant decline in households' 
indebtedness in the coming years is not likely. 
. The expected move of Nordea's 
headquarters to Finland by end-2018 would 
significantly increase the size of the banking 
sector. Following the expected relocation, the 
total assets of the country's banking sector are 
expected to reach about 420% of GDP and the 
deposit base is expected to expand from EUR 
50 billion to EUR 140 billion. Due to strong 
regional interconnections with other Nordic 
and Baltic countries, this calls for reinforced 
supervision and strong regional supervisory 
cooperation. The Finnish Deposit Guarantee 
Fund will become responsible for deposits also 
at Nordea's foreign branches. 



