EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 



The improved macroeconomic scenario is an 
asset for pursuing ambitious structural reforms, 
while improving the situation of public finances 
in France (1). After three years of moderate 
growth, economic activity in France has 
accelerated sharply in 2017. The government is 
undertaking important reform actions. A Grand 
Plan d'Investissement for the period 2018-2022 is 
on-going, as well as the implementation of adopted 
labour market reforms and additional measures to 
be launched, as regards the pension, 
unemployment benefit system, and vocational 
education and training. Meanwhile, challenges 
remain to improve public finances on a more 
sustainable basis, in particular while the high level 
of private debt is still a potential source of concern. 
These also include a comprehensive review of 
public finances, the simplification of the tax 
system and the increase in efficiency of the tax 
system. Improving access to the labour market for 
less qualified workers and people with a migrant 
background is also an issue. Reducing the 
administrative and regulatory burden and 
improving collaboration between public research 
and companies would contribute to increase the 
competitiveness of the French economy. 

(1) This report assesses France’s economy in the light of the 
European Commission’s Annual Growth Survey published 
on 22 November 2017. In the survey, the Commission calls 
on EU Member States to implement reforms to make the 
European economy more productive, resilient and 
inclusive. In so doing, Member States are encouraged to 
focus on the three elements of the virtuous triangle of 
economic policy — boosting investment, pursuing 
structural reforms, and ensuring responsible fiscal policies. 
At the same time, the Commission published the Alert 
Mechanism Report (AMR) that initiated the seventh round 
of the macroeconomic imbalance procedure. The AMR 
found that France warranted an in-depth review, which is 
presented in this report. 

Economic activity has accelerated and is 
forecast to remain strong in the near future. 
GDP growth in France increased to 1.8 % in 2017 
from 1.2 % in 2016. It was driven by strong private 
investment growth and in particular by a strong 
recovery in the housing market. According to the 
Commission 2018 winter forecast, GDP growth is 
expected to reach 2.0 % in 2018 and 1.8 % in 2019 
as spare capacity in the economy is reabsorbed. 
Private consumption growth is set to recover 
somewhat, while investment growth is expected to 
remain strong. Moreover, the contribution of net 
exports is expected to improve in a context of 
sustained global demand. 

The performance of French exports has stopped 
deteriorating. Export market shares have 
stabilised since 2012, led by more favourable 
developments in France’s main trade partners. The 
trade deficit is expected to have reached a trough 
in 2017, as imports remained more vigorous than 
exports and oil prices rebounded. External 
sustainability is not a concern for France in the 
short term, whilst the weak export performance 
continues to weigh on growth prospects. 

In the long term, growth is expected to remain 
moderate. In line with an EU-wide trend, France’s 
potential growth has been eroded since the 2008 
financial crisis. Yet, France’s potential growth 
increased to 1.0 % in 2016 and is expected to 
further accelerate, up to 1.3 % in 2019. Structural 
reforms have been planned and some have already 
been undertaken. They seek to address the 
economic challenges that limit potential growth. 

Competitiveness is improving, although France 
has not fully regained previous losses. The 
growth of unit labour costs has recently recovered, 
in line with increased economic activity. 
Productivity growth remains subdued and prevents 
French competitiveness from recovering more 
quickly. Labour market and tax reforms are on-
going. Additional measures have been launched to 
improve the competitiveness of the French 
economy, including product market reforms. The 
positive effect of these actions is likely to become 
more prominent in the medium term. 

France’s public indebtedness is high. The 
general government deficit is expected to decline 
below the threshold value of 3 % of GDP in 2017. 
However, the adjustment of government spending 
is proving difficult despite the dampening effect of 
the low interest burden. Debt is expected to 
stabilise at 96.9 % of GDP over the forecast 
horizon (2017-2019). Despite the objective to 
reduce expenditure more than 3 pps of GDP by 
2022, the identification and monitoring of 
structural savings are still unknown. In turn, 
targets for healthcare spending (ONDAM) and 
operational spending of local authorities 
(ODEDEL) are less demanding for 2018. As a 
result, it seems that France currently plans to ‘back 
load’ the envisaged consolidation effort by cutting 
spending in later years. 


Unemployment continues to fall. The 
unemployment rate declined from 10.4 % in 2015 
to 9.5 % in 2017 and is forecast to decrease further 
in the coming years, while the employment rate 
rose to 71 % in the third quarter 2017. Labour 
market conditions for younger, lower-skilled 
workers, and people with a migrant background 
(both first and second generations) remain more 
difficult. 

Its large economy and integration with the rest 
of the euro area make France a source of 
potentially significant cross-border spillovers. 
Model simulations suggest that product and labour 
market reforms in France can yield positive long-
term GDP effects for both France and the rest of 
the euro area. 

Overall, France has made some progress in 
addressing the 2017 country-specific 
recommendations. Some progress has been made 
in improving access to the labour market for 
jobseekers, ensuring that minimum wage 
developments are consistent with job creation and 
competitiveness, and further reducing the 
regulatory burden for firms. Some progress has 
also been made on taxation by decreasing the 
statutory corporate income tax rate and reducing 
the cost of labour. Limited progress has been made 
in ensuring the sustainability of public finances 
and reviewing expenditure items. There has also 
been only limited progress in raising the efficiency 
of public support schemes for innovation and 
revising the system of vocational education and 
training. No progress has been made in continuing 
to lift barriers to competition in the services sector. 

Regarding progress in reaching national targets 
under the Europe 2020 strategy, France is 
performing well in decreasing greenhouse gas 
emissions, improving energy efficiency, increasing 
tertiary education attainment and reducing early 
school leaving. More action is still needed to 
reduce poverty and increase the employment rate, 
R&D intensity, and the use of renewable energy. 

France performs relatively well on the 
indicators of the Social Scoreboard supporting 
the European Pillar of Social Rights. Overall, 
the social protection system is effective and shows 
good results both in the fields of social protection 
and health. France also has a low gender 
employment gap, relatively low income inequality, 
and a high share of children in formal childcare. 
Some issues in the areas of educational inequalities 
and labour market segmentation merit attention. 
Recently, the number of people at risk of poverty 
and social exclusion has also been rising, even if it 
remains at a relatively low level. 

The main findings of the in-depth review 
contained in this report, and the related policy 
challenges, are as follows: 

. Cost competitiveness has improved in recent 
years. Wage growth remains moderate. No ad-
hoc hike in the minimum wage has been 
decided since 2013. The possibility of 
reforming the minimum wage automatic 
indexation mechanism is under discussion. Tax 
measures have reduced labour costs. However, 
the competitiveness gap accumulated in 
previous years has not been closed yet. 
. Other factors driving the competitiveness of 
French exports continue to be weak. France’s 
share of the global market has been more 
resilient for services than goods since 2008, 
especially for business services. The share of 
low-, middle- and top-quality goods in total 
French exports has slightly increased, while the 
share of high-quality goods has significantly 
decreased. The proportion of exporting SMEs 
is lower in France than in other Member States. 
. The labour market situation continues to 
improve, yet challenges remain to be 
tackled, especially for some categories. The 
government has presented an ambitious reform 
agenda to the social partners. It includes the 
adopted reform of the labour law, as well as the 
announced reform of the systems for 
unemployment benefit, pensions, and 
vocational education and training, comprising 
apprenticeship. Remaining challenges concern 
the still high level of unemployment (especially 
for younger and lower-skilled people) and the 
segmentation of the labour market. The 
integration of disadvantaged groups in the 
labour market and their transition towards more 
stable forms of work can also be improved. 
This is particularly relevant for people with a 
migrant background. 



. The French business environment is middle-
ranking in comparison to major 
competitors. While investment remains 
dynamic with respect to the euro area, the 
government has announced measures to 
improve the business environment, as 
companies are still facing fast changing 
legislation, complex regulatory requirements 
and burdensome administrative procedures. 
Size-related regulatory thresholds continue to 
weigh on firms’ growth. Competition is still 
weak in several service sectors, notably in 
professional and business services. Lack of 
clarity and prioritisation about the French 
state’s objectives as shareholder in several 
large incumbent firms operating in sectors of 
major economic importance remains, including 
railways and energy. The new regulatory 
framework for the collaborative economy aims 
at taking into account the specificities of these 
services but holds back their development. 
France's low coverage with fast broadband also 
limits its ability to benefit from the digital 
economy. 
. High public debt coupled with already high 
structural deficits could be a source of 
significant risk for public finances in the 
medium term. Short-term sustainability risks 
remain low. Long-term risks are also 
contained, notably due to pension indexation 
rules and favourable demographics compared 
to the rest of the EU. Still, sustainability 
challenges in the medium term remain high and 
call for significant consolidation in the coming 
years to bring down public debt. The debt 
burden for the private sector continues to 
increase. The combination of high public and 
private debt is an additional risk factor. 
. A new expenditure-based consolidation 
strategy has been announced. The already 
very high tax burden leaves little margin for 
further tax increases, suggesting that further 
consolidation needs to be expenditure-based. A 
new spending review framework has been put 
forward, aiming to identify efficiency gains and 
to generate savings at all levels of the public 
administration. The concrete scope of this 
framework remains to be clarified and the 
framework has not yet been implemented. 
Reforms aiming at simplifying and improving 
the efficiency of spending are under 
consideration for pensions, healthcare, housing 
allowances and vocational training. 
. The tax system has been reformed to 
address the high tax burden on companies 
and favour productive investment. While 
these reforms aim to improve the business 
environment, the tax system continues to be 
complex. In addition, it is characterised by 
relatively low levels of consumption and 
environmental taxes and a high level of taxes 
on production. 


Other key structural issues analysed in this report, 
which point to particular challenges for France’s 
economy, are the following: 

. Educational inequalities remain high and 
the vocational education and training system 
presents some weaknesses in matching 
labour market needs. New measures have 
been adopted to reduce educational inequalities 
linked to socioeconomic background. The 
system of initial vocational education and 
training does not sufficiently foster access to 
employment, despite undertaken reforms. 
Access to the continuous vocational training 
system is uneven for different categories of 
employed workers and unemployed. 
. Social conditions in France are good overall. 
In general, the French social protection system 
appears effective in reducing poverty and 
exclusion and providing access to healthcare 
and childcare. Still, inequalities based on 
migration and socioeconomic background 
remain, especially in deprived urban areas. 
Some, mainly rural, areas face challenges in 
attracting physicians. Access to affordable 
housing can be challenging in urban areas. 
. Innovation performance remains below that 
of EU innovation leaders. The efficiency of 
public support schemes can be further 
improved. It is to be seen if the results of 
evaluations will lead to a sufficient policy 
response improving the overall performance of 
the system. In addition, knowledge transfer 
between public research and companies 
remains a challenge; there is room to further 
promote such collaboration. 



