Economic activity in Germany has been uneven but is expected to gradually strengthen. Domestic demand has eventually taken over as a main driver of growth and household consumption has developed well, but business investment has disappointed and remains subdued. Going forward, economic activity is expected to gradually strengthen. The positive outlook for employment, low interest rates and real wage growth should support private consumption. Business investment should recover, but the housing investment is set to slow to a more moderate pace. Import growth should strengthen, while exports should benefit from increasing demand in GermanyÕs trading partners. Falling oil prices will exert further downward pressure on consumer prices, but rising labour costs should uphold core inflation. This Country Report assesses GermanyÕs economy against the background of the CommissionÕs Annual Growth Survey, which recommends three main pillars for the EUÕs economic and social policy in 2015: investment, structural reforms and fiscal responsibility. In line with the Investment Plan for Europe, it also explores ways to maximise the impact of public resources and unlock private investment. Finally, it assesses Germany in the light of the findings of the 2015 Alert Mechanism Report, in which the Commission found it useful to further examine the persistence of imbalances or their unwinding. The main findings of the in-depth review contained in this Country Report are: . The current account consistently shows a very high surplus, which is projected to increase to 8 % of gross domestic product (GDP) in 2015. This is owed to a trade surplus resulting from strong competitiveness, notably in the export-oriented manufacturing sector, and high revenues from private sector investment abroad, which have not been offset by increased domestic demand, in particular due to weak investment. The impact of low energy prices is also contributing to the surplus. GermanyÕs current account surplus in relation to its euro-area partners has fallen to less than a quarter of the total surplus, indicating an on-going rebalancing process in the euro area. . Private consumption has strengthened, but several factors may hamper future growth. Some features of the tax system may hamper future private consumption. These include the high tax burden on labour and the impact of fiscal drag on disposable incomes. Moreover, the surging costs of renewable energies have affected householdsÕ disposable incomes. . Consistently weak business investment and insufficient public investment remain a drag on growth. Private sector investment has disappointed owing to continued weakness in machinery and equipment investment, and a loss of momentum in growth of residential investment. While investments made by German companies abroad are buoyant, the domestic investment slump is noteworthy given the supportive conditions for capital formation. Public investment has fallen short of the required, and current federal fiscal relations have not ensured adequate public investment at the level of municipalities. . Germany is closely integrated with the euro area and economic spillovers imply that Germany's economic developments can benefit but also adversely affect other Member States. The German market is an important export destination for other euro area Member States, in particular for countries integrated into German firmsÕ production chain. While euro area partners benefit from GermanyÕs success in trading, the weak domestic investment, falling potential growth and dependence on external conditions pose risks to both Germany and the euro area. The Country Report also analyses other macroeconomic and structural issues and the main findings are: . Public finances: Balanced headline budgets and structural surpluses in the years to come create scope for investment in the economyÕs future growth potential. The tax burden on labour remains high, in particular for low-wage earners, while the scope for shifting taxes to more growth-friendly revenue sources appears underused. Last yearÕs pension reform put an additional strain on the sustainability of the pension system and the share of public spending on healthcare (in GDP) is one of the highest in the EU. The implementation of the constitutional balanced-budget rule (Ôdebt brakeÕ) at federal state level is not yet complete. . Financial sector: The banking sector has become more resilient, but impediments to consolidation in the public banking sector remain and venture capital is underdeveloped. Low profitability and low interest rates may pose a challenge for institutional investors.  . Labour market, education and social policies: Employment continues to rise and unemployment is at a record low. Despite the current overall favourable situation, skills shortages are emerging, unemployment in some regions remains relatively high and the workforce is projected to decline in the medium to long term due to demographic change. In this context, insufficient incentives to work and the employability of workers remain an issue, also with a view to improving their income. Long-term unemployment is an increasing concern and it is still at a high level. . Energy, transport, services and public procurement: More renewable electricity, combined with insufficient transmission capacity, poses a challenge for network management. Barriers to competition persist in the professional services and railway sectors, while the rate of publication of public contracts under EU procurement legislation remains very low. Overall, Germany has made limited progress in addressing the 2014 country-specific recommendations. As regards policies relevant to the Macroeconomic Imbalance Procedure, some steps were taken to increase public investment, but they appear insufficient to address the investment backlog in infrastructure, education and research. No measures were taken to improve the efficiency of the tax system or reduce high taxes and social contributions. The potential of the general minimum wage to foster private consumption may be limited. As regards recommendations to address other policy challenges, Germany has taken some action to enhance the cost-effectiveness of public spending, but has not acted to ensure the sustainability of the pension system. Germany is making progress in addressing shortages in childcare and all-day schooling, but fiscal disincentives to work have not been tackled. No significant efforts have been made to stimulate competition in the railway and service sectors. This Country Report reveals the policy challenges stemming from the analysis of macroeconomic imbalances. In particular, while GermanyÕs international competitiveness is an asset, the country would benefit from greater tapping of domestic sources of growth. In particular:  . A boost to investment could unlock the countryÕs future growth potential. Taking advantage of its fiscal space would enable Germany to address the backlog in public investment. Improvements in the business environment and corporate taxation would support private sector investment. Substantial investment is needed in both energy infrastructure and energy efficiency if Germany is to reach its targets. Initiatives to reap efficiency gains from sectoral reform, e.g. in the services sector, would also support investment. . Further tap into the labour and skills potential to strengthen growth and incomes. Reducing disincentives to take up a job or to increase working time and facilitating better education outcomes would also help Germany to increase its growth potential. Addressing the impact of fiscal drag and dealing with the (potential) employment effects of the minimum wage are key medium-term policy challenges in order to ensure appropriate conditions for domestic demand Other challenges are: . Structural policies favouring sustainable long-term growth. In the energy sector, it seems important to continue monitoring the impact of renewable energy reform on consumer costs and to coordinate energy policies with neighbouring countries. Moreover, there appears to be scope for sectoral reform to improve competition, particularly in the professional services and railway sectors.  