EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 



Hungary's steady economic recovery offers a 
window of opportunity to ensure sustainable 
growth in the coming decade.(1) The country's 
financial vulnerabilities seen in the aftermath of 
the crisis have been markedly reduced and the 
economy has been staging a steady recovery. Real 
GDP surpassed its pre-crisis peak in 2014, whereas 
domestic demand and investment reached similar 
levels by 2017. The growth potential has been 
gradually recovering, albeit it still remains 
moderate for a catching-up economy. Reflecting 
also the costs of economic adjustment, the income 
convergence of the country has been relatively 
slow lagging behind regional peers. The main 
challenge now is to bolster economic convergence 
by well-designed structural reforms, while 
maintaining a balanced growth path. 

(1) This report assesses Hungary’s economy in the light of the 

European Commission’s Annual Growth Survey published 
on 22 November 2017. In the survey, the Commission calls 
on EU Member States to implement reforms to make the 
European economy more productive, resilient and 
inclusive. In so doing, Member States should focus their 
efforts on the three elements of the virtuous triangle of 
economic policy — boosting investment, pursuing 
structural reforms and ensuring responsible fiscal policies. 

After a temporary lull, the Hungarian economy 
grew strongly in 2017. GDP is estimated to have 
grown above potential helped by a supportive 
external environment and accommodative 
domestic policies. Household consumption was 
boosted by double-digit wage growth. Investment 
picked up strongly also due to the resumption of 
EU fund absorption. Corporate investment by large 
firms gained momentum, while household 
investment increased sharply albeit from a low 
level. Healthy export growth mirrored global 
developments, but the contribution of net exports 
to growth turned negative as imports grew even 
faster. Inflation increased and approached the 
central bank's target. In 2018, growth is projected 
to remain strong as supporting factors are expected 
to prevail. 

Employment reached record-highs. While the 
economic upturn is the main driving force, policy 
measures also helped to improve the labour market 
situation. Cross-border labour migration and 
adverse demographic trends however reduced 
labour supply, particularly among skilled workers. 
The unemployment rate thus fell to its lowest level 
on record in 2017, and in certain segments labour 
shortages emerged. 

Bank lending picked up. New lending grew 
strongly, while banks rapidly reduced the stock of 
non-performing loans in 2017. As a result, credit 
stock grew at a rate close to nominal GDP growth 
and asset quality improved significantly. The 
economic recovery and central bank measures 
facilitated the process. Banks comfortably met 
capital requirements and returned to profitability. 

The fiscal stance is loosening. Despite buoyant 
domestic demand, the headline deficit is forecast to 
increase from 1.9 % of GDP in 2016 to around 
2.5 % in 2018. Hence, the structural fiscal balance 
is projected to deteriorate well below the country's 
medium-term objective. This results mainly from 
significant cuts in social contributions and taxes. 
The government debt-to-GDP ratio has been 
decreasing gradually and is expected to decline 
further in the next two years thanks to high 
nominal GDP growth. However, in the absence of 
future fiscal adjustment, this positive trend is at 
risk in the medium term 

Albeit contained at this stage, risks to a 
balanced growth path may start to emerge. 
High capacity utilisation suggests that the 
economy is now moving above potential. 
Particularly, labour supply may soon reach its 
limits, adding to the already considerable wage 
pressure. House prices have been increasing 
rapidly since 2014. Nevertheless, domestic 
demand in real terms only reached the pre-crisis 
level in 2017, and real house prices stayed below 
pre-crisis levels. Moreover, the current account 
remained in surplus. However, the pressure on 
consumer prices may accumulate if consumption 
growth accelerates further on the back of fast wage 
growth, falling precautionary savings and strong 
lending. 

Hungary made limited progress in addressing 
the 2017 country-specific recommendations. 
Whereas some progress was made in reducing the 
tax wedge for low-income earners, less was 
achieved in reducing the complexity of the tax 
system. Some progress was made in strengthening 
transparency and competition in public 
procurement, but progress was limited in 
strengthening the anti-corruption framework. 
Limited progress was made in improving the 
regulatory environment in services. There was 
some progress in better targeting the public work 
scheme and reinforcing other active labour market 


policies. The progress was limited in increasing the 
participation of disadvantaged groups, in particular 
Roma, in inclusive mainstream education and in 
improving the adequacy and coverage of social 
assistance and unemployment benefits. 

Regarding the progress on reaching the national 
targets under the Europe 2020 Strategy, Hungary is 
performing well in reducing greenhouse gas 
emissions, increasing renewable energy, tertiary 
education and the employment rate; while more 
effort is needed to increase R&D intensity and 
reduce early school leaving and poverty. 

Hungary performs well on a number of 
indicators of the Social Scoreboard supporting 
the European Pillar of Social Rights, but 
challenges remain. The gender employment gap 
merits attention, together with the low share of 
children under the age of 3 enrolled in formal 
childcare. The share of early school leavers 
increased further from an already high level. 
Employment outcomes have been buoyed by the 
recovery. Income inequality is relatively low and 
the effectiveness of social transfers in reducing 
poverty remains comparatively high despite some 
deterioration recently. 

Key structural issues analysed in this report, which 
point to particular challenges for Hungary's 
economy, are the following: 

. Several measures have been implemented to 
improve the tax system, but some problems 
remain. The country's high tax burden is set to 
moderate due to sizable tax cuts. Moreover, the 
lowering of social contributions helps to ease 
the impact of wage increases on labour costs. 
Nevertheless, without offsetting measures, 
these tax cuts pose medium-term fiscal risks. 
While decreasing, the tax wedge on labour, 
especially for certain low-income groups, is 
still high in EU comparison. The complexity of 
the tax system, coupled with the continued 
presence of sector-specific taxes, remains a 
weakness. Administrative burdens of tax 
collection are still significant, but considerable 
efforts have been made to address this. Some 
indicators suggest that Hungary's tax rules may 
be used by multinationals in aggressive tax 
planning structures. It is shown by the large 
capital flows as a share of GDP through special 
purpose entities, combined with the absence of 
withholding taxes. 
. Hungary faces a pronounced productivity 
challenge. Productivity growth has been slow 
for a decade now compared to peer countries. 
Although potential growth estimates show 
some recovery, the challenge is becoming more 
pressing as labour reserves diminish. There are 
wide and persistent productivity differences 
between export-oriented, mainly foreign-
owned companies and smaller domestic firms, 
with limited positive spill-overs from the high-
productivity segment. The propensity of SMEs 
to innovate is low and Hungary remains a 
moderate user of digital technologies. 
Regulatory barriers in services and retail trade 
and unpredictability of regulation hamper the 
efficient reallocation of resources. Institutional 
weaknesses and human capital inadequacies 
also constrain productivity growth. 
. Weaknesses in institutional soundness and 
governance could weigh on the country's 
economic convergence. Limited transparency 
and quality of policy making is a source of 
uncertainty for investors. There are deficits in 
evidence-based policy formulation and 
stakeholder engagement. Social dialogue 
structures and processes remain 
underdeveloped. Hungary performs weakly on 
the accessibility and quality of public 
information. Challenges concerning the 
functioning of the justice system require close 
monitoring. Available indicators point to 
notable corruption risks, and there are gaps in 
the anti-corruption framework. Important 
measures were taken regarding public 
procurement, but there remains scope to further 
improve transparency and competition in 
tendering processes. 
. The education and healthcare systems reveal 
shortcomings in fostering the development 
of human capital. Education outcomes in 
basic skills are significantly below the EU 
average. The impact of socioeconomic 
background on education outcomes is among 
the highest in the EU. Disadvantaged students, 
in particular Roma, remain concentrated in 
certain schools. The health system is faced with 
high risks from unhealthy lifestyles, uneven 



quality of care and disparities in access. While 
showing improvements, health outcomes lag 
behind most other EU countries reflecting also 
the limited effectiveness of healthcare 
provision. Despite reform efforts, the setup of 
service delivery remains strongly hospital 
centred, with weaknesses in primary care and 
care coordination of chronic disease patients. 
. Employment policies face the challenge of 
mobilising labour reserves fast enough to 
meet strong labour demand. While the public 
work scheme still remains the main active 
labour market policy, it has had limited success 
in bringing participants back to the labour 
market. Nevertheless the number of its 
participants started to diminish thanks to the 
strengthened recovery. The government is 
taking further steps to facilitate this process, 
while other active labour market policies are 
gradually expanding. However, an evidenced-
based system that would help jobseekers to 
receive services tailored to their particular 
needs is not yet in place. The high gender 
employment gap points to untapped labour 
reserves. To utilize this reserve, measures were 
taken to improve the availability of childcare 
facilities. The low employment rate of Roma 
remains an important challenge. 
. Overall, the situation regarding poverty 
improved notably, but vulnerable groups 
continue to face high risk of poverty. While 
the share of population at risk of poverty and 
social exclusion is falling, it is still above the 
EU average. Children and the Roma remain 
much more exposed to the risk of poverty than 
the rest of the population. Changes in the tax 
and benefit system contributed to rising income 
inequality. There has been a clear shift from 
social benefits towards work-related family 
supports and in-kind benefits, which are not 
sufficiently targeted to the poor. At the same 
time, the adequacy of social assistance and 
unemployment benefits declined. While home-
ownership subsidies expanded, there is no 
improvement in social housing. 



