EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 



The sustained strong economic growth in 
Ireland provides ample momentum to further 
increase the resilience of the public and private 
sectors. A continued reduction in government debt 
and deficit could create tailwinds against the 
possible materialization of external risks. 
Moreover, a rebalancing towards less volatile 
sources of government revenues could ensure the 
sustainability of public finances in the long run. 
Improvements in the balance sheets of households, 
companies and banks reflect continued 
deleveraging and progress in resolving 
non-performing loans. Addressing these challenges 
would reduce the risk of a slowdown, should the 
external environment and financial conditions 
become less supportive. A tightening labour 
market, with rapidly subsiding unemployment, 
brings to the fore the importance of increases in 
labour market participation, while accumulating 
skills shortages further accentuate the need to 
continue upskilling efforts. Ensuring that the 
already broad-based growth reaches all parts of 
society, including addressing the remaining 
housing, social and infrastructural shortcomings, 
remains a government priority (1). 

(1) This report assesses Ireland’s economy in the light of the 
European Commission’s Annual Growth Survey published 
on 22 November 2017. In the survey, the Commission calls 
on EU Member States to implement reforms to make the 
European economy more productive, resilient and 
inclusive. In so doing, Member States should focus their 
efforts on the three elements of the virtuous triangle of 
economic policy — boosting investment, pursuing 
structural reforms and ensuring responsible fiscal policies. 
At the same time, the Commission published the Alert 
Mechanism Report (AMR) that initiated the seventh round 
of the macroeconomic imbalance procedure. The AMR 
found that Ireland warranted an in-depth review, which is 
presented in this report. 

(2) Projections for 2019 are based on a purely technical 
assumption that trade relations between the EU-27 and the 
UK will remain unchanged. This is for forecasting 
purposes only and has no bearing on the talks in the context 
of the Article 50 process. 

The Irish economy continues to grow at a solid 
pace. In the first three quarters of 2017, real GDP 
increased by 7.4 % year-on-year (y-o-y), well 
above the euro area average. It is projected to 
further increase by 4.4 % in 2018 and 3.1 % in 
2019 (2). Uncertainties persist, primarily related to 
the outcome of the negotiations between the UK 
and the EU and potential changes to the 
international taxation environment. Ireland is one 
of the most affected Member States by the UK's 
decision to leave the EU, given the nature of the 

all-island economy, Ireland's geographical position 
and the volume of trade between the two countries. 

Domestic economic activity continues to thrive. 
Modified domestic demand, a new measure of 
domestic activity that strips out some of the effects 
of multinationals, increased in 2016 and the first 
three quarters of 2017, driven by private 
consumption and construction investment. The 
strong, broad-based growth in employment also 
reflects the strength of domestic activity. 

The labour market remains strong, with some 
outstanding challenges. In the third quarter of 
2017, total employment increased by 2.9 % on an 
annual basis, and across almost all economic 
sectors. Full-time employment increased by 7.1 % 
as people who had been working part-time are 
moving into full-time jobs. The unemployment 
rate fell to 6.7 % in 2017. In the third quarter of 
2017, very long-term unemployment (over two 
years) stood at 28.9 % of all unemployment, 
somewhat above the EU average. Some challenges 
remain in relation to high inactivity rates and skills 
shortages in certain sectors. Some households also 
continue to experience poverty and social 
exclusion and the homelessness rate continues to 
increase. 

The government has repeatedly intervened to 
tackle the undersupply of housing, but it will 
take time for the measures to have an effect. 
Against the backdrop of a limited housing stock, 
residential property price growth accelerated. 
Years of low investment following the economic 
bust are taking their toll on the availability of 
supporting infrastructure for residential sector 
construction (such as water and transport), 
constraining housing supply. Although prices did 
not seem overvalued in 2016, affordability is a 
concern. 

The government deficit is moving closer to 
balance. The general government deficit is 
expected to decline further in the near future, 
although progress in making public finances more 
resilient has slowed down in recent years. Relying 
on highly volatile, highly pro-cyclical sources of 
revenue remains a risk. 

Ireland has made some progress in addressing 
the 2017 country-specific recommendations 
(CSRs). With regard to the fiscal 


recommendations, it made some progress in 2017. 
The proceeds from the sale of government shares 
in state-owned banks have been used to reduce 
public debt and the National Asset Management 
Agency redeemed all of its government-guaranteed 
debt. As regards the recommendation to limit the 
scope and the number of tax expenditures and 
broaden the tax base, only a few of the measures 
taken have the potential to broaden the tax base. A 
new spending review signals progress in enhancing 
the quality of expenditure. Some progress has also 
been made in improving social infrastructure and 
delivering an integrated package of labour market 
activation policies. However, it remains difficult to 
access affordable, full-time, quality childcare. 
With regard to the lasting reduction of non-
performing loans (NPLs), Ireland made some 
progress in 2017 as the stock of NPLs decreased. 
Insolvency procedures, in- and out-of-court arrears 
resolution avenues remain under-used. The credit 
register should become operational in 2018. 

Regarding progress in reaching the national 
Europe 2020 strategy targets, Ireland is performing 
well on the employment rate and early school 
leaving targets. It needs to do more on investing in 
R&D, reducing greenhouse gas emissions, 
increasing the proportion of renewable energy, 
improving energy efficiency, reaching the national 
target for tertiary education and reducing poverty. 

Ireland performs relatively well on most 
indicators of the Social Scoreboard supporting 
the European Pillar of Social Rights, while 
challenges remain. Ireland is tackling poverty and 
social exclusion and preventing early school 
leaving. Social protection systems do relatively 
well in reducing poverty and promoting social 
inclusion. Work-life balance measures are 
improving as take-up of childcare for children 
under three years has increased in recent years. 
Healthcare and homelessness show significant 
room for improvement. Despite its many 
information and communication technology (ICT) 
graduates, the proportion of the overall population 
having basic digital skills in Ireland remains low. 

The main findings of the in-depth review 
contained in this report and the related policy 
challenges are as follows: 

. Private debt levels continue to fall, 
improving the resilience of households and 
businesses. A large part of the stock of private 
debt in Ireland is attributed to multinational 
corporations with more modest linkages to the 
domestic economy. Domestic economic actors 
overall continue to reduce their debt bringing it 
broadly in line with fundamentals. Hence, the 
headline private debt levels somewhat overstate 
the severity of this imbalance. The growth in 
house prices increased the net worth of 
households and reduced the number of those in 
negative equity. 
. Public debt continues to fall, but remains 
high. As a percentage of GDP it significantly 
declined to 72.8 % in 2016, on the back of 
strong nominal GDP growth. However, 
complementary indicators, including some 
which strip out the effect of multinationals, 
suggest that the burden of public debt remains 
significant by historical and international 
standards, exposing Ireland to economic shocks 
. While Ireland's net international investment 
position remains very negative, risks to the 
external position of domestic sectors seem 
contained. The country’s negative net 
international investment position has improved 
somewhat after significantly deteriorating in 
2015, but remains large. The non-financial 
corporate sector contributes the most to the 
negative balance, driven by the activities of a 
small number of very large multinationals with 
few implications for the external sustainability 
of the domestic sector. The risks associated 
with the external liabilities of these companies 
are mitigated by factors such as high 
profitability and offsetting overseas assets. 
Moreover, these liabilities are not linked to 
Irish investors. On the other hand, the net 
external position of the domestic sectors has 
improved. 
. On the way to a sustained recovery of the 
financial sector, legacy issues still create 
constraints. Domestic banks have remained 
profitable and strengthened their capital ratios. 
They have also further reduced their NPLs, 
even though their stock remains considerable 
and provisioning coverage ratios fairly low. 
Their overall good performance allows for a 
more ambitious NPL reduction pace in 
particular through durable restructurings and 



write-offs. Long-term mortgage arrears (over 
two years past due) remain the biggest 
challenge. Insolvency procedures, in- and out-
of-court options for arrears resolution remain 
little used. A fully functioning credit register, 
expected in 2018, will be crucial for assessing 
the debt servicing capacities of borrowers. 
. Rapid house price increases are observed 
countrywide. Residential property prices rose 
by 11.6 % y-o-y to November 2017, continuing 
the upward trend of the previous years. Private 
sector rents have continued to increase, 
exceeding their pre-crisis peak. The 
macroprudential framework in place is 
expected to ensure that new credit is extended 
under prudent conditions, preventing any 
potential credit bubble. This is especially 
important given the current high demand for 
mortgages. 


Other key structural issues analysed in this report, 
which point to particular challenges for Ireland’s 
economy, are the following: 

. Broadening the tax base could help improve 
revenue stability in the face of economic 
fluctuations. In particular, taxes on corporate 
income as a proportion of total taxation 
continued to rise. In Ireland’s case such taxes 
are highly concentrated and prone to volatility. 
. Debt overhang and uncertainty in some 
exporting sectors affect corporate credit 
demand. While some sectors are starting to 
borrow again, companies that export to the UK 
may be delaying some of their investment and 
borrowing decisions. Collateral and guarantee 
requirements, alongside interest rates above the 
EU average, could be curbing demand further. 
. The strong labour market has had a positive 
impact on a number of social issues, but 
some challenges remain. Inactivity is still a 
concern, with a large proportion of the working 
age population remaining outside the labour 
force. The lack of access to affordable 
childcare services forces many, in particular 
women, into inactivity. The employment rate 
of people with disabilities is one of the lowest 
in the EU. Skills shortages are becoming 
increasingly apparent, most notably in ICT, 
financial services and engineering. Ireland has 
a relatively low level of the population with 
basic digital skills. Many people have yet to 
reap the benefits of the economic upturn. 
. Some indicators suggest that Ireland’s tax 
rules are used by multinationals engaged in 
aggressive tax planning structures. Ireland 
has taken steps to amend some aspects of its 
tax system that may facilitate aggressive tax 
planning and is carrying out a consultation on 
further changes. However, the absence of some 
anti-abuse rules or the exemption from 
withholding taxes on dividend payments made 
by companies based in Ireland suggest that 
Ireland's corporate tax rules may still be used in 
tax avoidance structures. 
. Addressing emerging infrastructure 
bottlenecks is essential for sustainable and 
balanced growth in the future. Combined 
with better spatial planning, improved 
infrastructure services, including for transport, 
energy and water, are critical enablers for an 
appropriate housing supply response, the 
enhancement of private investment and 
economic development. Finally, infrastructure 
investment as well as intensified efforts in the 
field of renewables will be essential for Ireland 
to succeed in its transition towards a low-
carbon and environmentally resilient economy. 
The new Project Ireland 2040 framework 
proposes a series of measures to address the 
above-mentioned bottlenecks and promote a 
regionally balanced development model. 
. A comparatively costly healthcare system, 
compounded by an ageing population, 
represent important challenges for the 
healthcare system. Demographic changes are 
projected to affect Ireland in the coming years, 
in particular the fiscal sustainability of its 
healthcare system. Multi-year budgeting and 
better expenditure control would support the 
much needed shift towards universal 
healthcare. Primary and community care 
services are not yet capable of alleviating the 
mounting pressure on capacity within hospital 
care. 
. The productivity of domestic companies is 
lower, and growing at a slower pace, in 



comparison with the multinationals 
operating in Ireland. Positive spillovers from 
the multinationals appear when domestic 
companies are integrated with them in value 
chains. Spillovers from the multinationals 
could be greater if domestic companies 
invested more in R&D and innovation. Overall, 
Ireland is a strong innovator and continues to 
improve its position in international innovation 
rankings, but low public expenditure on R&D 
remains a cause for concern. 



