EXECUTIVE SUMMARY The economic outlook has improved markedly. Exceptionally strong net exports made Ireland the fastest growing economy in the EU in 2014. Although the contribution from net exports is likely to moderate, strong investment growth and the recovery in private consumption should underpin real GDP growth of about 3.5% in 2015 and 2016. The recovery has been job-rich and unemployment fell to 10.6 % at the end of 2014. The better macroeconomic environment has buoyed tax revenue and helped achieve fiscal targets despite expenditure overruns compared to budget profiles. It has also helped improve bank performance and ease the deleveraging process. Market perceptions of Ireland have improved significantly amid a general improvement in financial market conditions. The spread over 10.year German bunds fell to about 80 basis points in early 2015, bolstering sovereign debt and banks. This country report assesses Ireland.s economy against the background of the Commission.s Annual Growth Survey which recommends three main pillars for the EU.s economic and social policy in 2015: investment, structural reforms, and fiscal responsibility. In line with the Investment Plan for Europe, it explores ways to maximise the impact of public resources and unlock private investment. Finally, it assesses Ireland in the light of the findings of the Alert Mechanism Report 2015, in which the Commission found it useful to examine further the persistence of imbalances or their unwinding. These are the main findings of the in-depth review in this country report: ¥ Private sector indebtedness declined in 2014 but is still high and well above the EU average. Corporate debt levels are inflated by the presence of multinationals, and SMEs have borne the brunt of the deleveraging among corporates. Deleveraging needs vary significantly among SMEs. High levels of debt are concentrated in a relatively small proportion of firms, while the majority are now either debt-free or able to service their debt. Debt repayments by households still outpace new borrowing as they continue to actively deleverage against a backdrop of resurgent economic growth and rising property prices. ¥ Public sector debt remains above GDP, but is expected to fall pending continued budget consolidation efforts and sustained economic growth. One-off factors accounted for most of the 12.5 percentage point drop in the debt-to-GDP ratio to 110.8 % in 2014. Public debt is mostly long-term and carries low interest rates reducing refinancing risks. ¥ Financial sector challenges are diminishing as domestic banks have been restructured, downsized and recapitalised. Profitability is still a problem, but it continues to improve and the banks' strengthened position was reflected in the results of the European Central Bank's comprehensive assessment. The regulatory and supervisory systems have been strengthened. However, the high share of non-performing loans is falling slowly, in particular in the mortgages and commercial loans. ¥ The external accounts have strengthened considerably over the past few years. The economy has regained competitiveness and the rebalancing between the tradable and non.tradable sectors seems to be nearing completion. Ireland.s external accounts need to be interpreted with care, however, and although the net international investment position is falling, it remains highly negative. ¥ The labour market situation has improved, but long-term unemployment remains a problem. While the unemployment rate is now below the euro area average, the share of structural unemployment risks increasing. The adjustment need is compounded by the skills mismatches that have emerged with the rebalancing of the economy between the non.tradable and tradable sectors and by the difficulties in re-skilling or up-skilling workers. This country report also analyses other macroeconomic and structural issues and the main findings are: ¥ The healthcare sector is facing sustainability challenges. Expenditure overruns have been recurrent in the past few years, which shows that while efficiency gains have been achieved in recent years, the health system may have reached a point beyond which containing expected cost increases would imply deeper structural reforms. Executive summary ¥ SME access to finance remains heavily reliant on bank lending and the use of non.bank financing options is yet to develop. ¥ The high proportion of people living in households with low work intensity generates social challenges. Limited access to affordable and quality childcare is a barrier to increased female labour market participation. Ireland has made some progress in addressing the country-specific recommendations the Council issued in 2014. Some progress was made in the areas of fiscal consolidation, the labour market, and non-performing loans restructuring. Budget 2015 complies with the Stability and Growth Pact, but the 2015 and 2016 deficit targets could have been more ambitious given strong economic growth, and expenditure ceilings still need to be strengthened. The introduction of training and activation programmes is progressing. Initiatives have been put in place to improve the financing conditions for SMEs. The restructuring of SMEs and household loans in arrears is ongoing. Some progress has been made in the area of healthcare, including in reducing public spending on pharmaceuticals. Limited progress has been made in tackling the low work intensity of households, with no progress on improving access to affordable and full-time childcare. Limited progress has been made towards reducing the cost of legal services, but some progress has been made on improving data collection systems in courts. The country report reveals the policy challenges stemming from the analysis of macro-economic imbalances: ¥ Private and public sector deleveraging has a further way to go. Further deleveraging is necessary to ensure that debt levels are sustainable and do not weigh on the growth prospects. Strict adherence to the planned fiscal adjustment under the Excessive Deficit Procedure and subsequent progress towards achieving the medium-term budgetary objective would ensure that public finances are firmly set on a sustainable path. Further growth-friendly tax reforms, including broadening the tax base, would support the adjustment process. ¥ Lowering the still high level of non.performing loans would imply further loan arrears resolution. In particular, this would entail a constant monitoring of the sustainability of the solutions agreed between lenders and debtors. Making the credit registry operational in 2016 as planned would be an important step towards enabling lenders to make informed lending decisions. ¥ Improving SME access to bank and non.bank finance is important for growth and promoting jobs and investment. Accessible information about financing options is crucial for an increased use of public support schemes. ¥ The labour market will continue to face adjustment needs for years to come, even though employment growth has been sustained lately. Tackling skills mismatches fully would avoid higher structural unemployment, contribute to the sustainability of Ireland's growth model and improve social indicators. Other challenges are: ¥ Untapped efficiency gains can be reaped in the health system to meet future increases in demand for care. Such gains would enable favourable health outcomes at an affordable cost to society. ¥ The proportion of people living in low work intensity households is high. The improved labour market situation alone is unlikely to solve the problem. ¥ The cost of legal services remains high. A new regulatory framework is in Parliament. Its final design and implementation will determine its effectiveness. ¥ Weaknesses in network industries persist. Addressing them in the current environment could prove challenging, particularly as far as the water sector is concerned. 