EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 



Italy’s ongoing recovery offers a window of 
opportunity to boost the reform momentum. By 
fully implementing already adopted measures and 
completing key reforms in the pipeline, Italy could 
lift its sluggish potential growth, rooted in weak 
productivity. This would reduce the risk of a 
slowdown, should the external environment and 
financial conditions become less supportive. In 
particular, Italy's resilience could be helped by 
improving the business environment — notably by 
reforming the judicial process and the insolvency 
and taxation frameworks — and strengthening the 
banking system and the labour market. (1) 

(1) This report assesses Italy’s economy in the light of the 
European Commission’s Annual Growth Survey published 
on 22 November 2017. In the survey, the Commission calls 
on EU Member States to implement reforms to make the 
European economy more productive, resilient and 
inclusive. In so doing, Member States are encouraged to 
focus on the three elements of the virtuous triangle of 
economic policy — boosting investment, pursuing 
structural reforms and ensuring responsible fiscal policies. 
At the same time, the Commission published the Alert 
Mechanism Report (AMR) that initiated the seventh round 
of the macroeconomic imbalance procedure. The AMR 
found that Italy warranted an in-depth review, which is 
presented in this report. 

Italy's recovery has strengthened. Supported by 
the accommodative monetary policy stance of the 
European Central Bank (ECB) and buoyant 
external demand, Italy’s real GDP growth is 
projected at 1.5 % in both 2017 and 2018. It is 
expected to slow to 1.2 % in 2019. Rising demand 
and favourable financing conditions have started to 
support investment again after the sharp fall it 
suffered during the global financial crisis. 

Labour market conditions continue to improve. 
Headcount employment (15-74 years) rose by 
1.0 % in 2017 to over 23 million people, taking it 
back to pre-crisis levels. The employment rate (20-
64 years) rose to 62.7 % last year, largely driven 
by temporary employment, after a sharp increase 
in permanent contracts in 2015-2016. Employment 
is set to increase further in 2018-2019, albeit at a 
more moderate pace of 0.8 %. As inactive people 
join the labour force, higher activity rates will 
support medium term growth prospects. In the 
short term, however, this will reduce the 
unemployment rate only gradually. 

Given its systemic importance, Italy is a source 
of potentially significant spillovers to the rest of 
the euro area. Italy is also an important export 

market for a number of euro area countries and 
maintains strong financial linkages to other euro 
area countries. 

Long-standing structural weaknesses and 
regional disparities continue to weigh on Italy’s 
growth potential. Despite the recent recovery, 
Italy’s real GDP is still below its pre-crisis peak 
and growing at a slower pace than in peer euro 
area economies. Regional differences persist both 
in economic prospects and employment growth. 
Long-term and youth unemployment remain very 
high. While the recovery has slightly reduced the 
headline deficit, Italy’s public debt has continued 
to grow and is set to have peaked at 132.1 % of 
GDP in 2017. Despite historically low financing 
costs, private sector credit growth is still muted. 

Italy has made some progress in addressing the 
2017 country-specific recommendations. Italy 
made substantial progress in adopting measures to 
increase tax compliance and fight corruption. 
Some progress was made in reforming the public 
administration, addressing restrictions to 
competition, repairing the banking system and 
rationalising social spending. Only limited 
progress was made in shifting the tax burden, 
reducing trial length in civil justice and reforming 
the insolvency framework. Gaps also remain in 
reforming collective bargaining, active labour 
market policies, and in enhancing access to work 
for second earners. 

Regarding the Europe 2020 Strategy, Italy already 
achieved its targets on renewable energy, energy 
efficiency, early school leaving and tertiary 
education, and appears on track on greenhouse gas 
emissions reduction. Limited progress has been 
made in meeting the targets on employment rate, 
R&D investment and poverty and social exclusion. 

Italy faces challenges with regard to a number 
of indicators of the Social Scoreboard 
supporting the European Pillar of Social Rights. 
In particular, Italy has a very high gender 
employment gap, low overall employment rate and 
high and increasing income inequality. The impact 
of social transfers is low, but policy action has 
been taken recently. The share of young people not 
in employment, education or training is very high, 
although declining. While health outcomes are 
overall good, the high proportion of the population 
with self-reported unmet needs for medical care 


continues to be a challenge. Italy also has a high 
and increasing risk of poverty or social exclusion, 
a high number of early leavers from education and 
training and a low level of digital skills. 

The main findings of the in-depth review 
contained in this report, and the related policy 
challenges, are as follows. 

. Italy’s high public debt remains a major 
vulnerability. The public debt-to-GDP ratio is 
forecast to stabilise at around 130 % of GDP 
over 2017-2019. Still low but rising inflation, 
limited increase in the primary surplus and 
below-target privatisation proceeds continue to 
hinder debt-reduction efforts. Yet, refinancing 
risks seem limited in the short term mainly 
thanks to ample liquidity in the market and an 
improved external position. Medium-term 
sustainability risks remain high as the structural 
primary surplus, at 1.6 % of GDP in 2018, is 
insufficient to bring about a rapid decrease in 
public debt. The long-term fiscal sustainability 
secured by past pension and healthcare reforms 
is weakening too due to recent policy measures 
and adverse demographic trends. Overall, risks 
may emerge if the current accommodative 
monetary policy stance were to be reversed. 
. Productivity growth still remains weak. 
Italy’s productivity growth has been sluggish 
over the past two decades due to persistently 
stagnant total factor productivity and low 
investment including in education and 
intangibles. Neither has regained its pre-crisis 
level yet. Certain features of the managerial 
practices in the numerous small businesses, the 
misallocation of resources among sectors and 
firms, and public expenditure that is biased 
towards old-age pensions constitute a further 
drag on productivity. In turn, the sluggish 
productivity growth has also contributed to past 
losses in competitiveness, although Italy has 
started regaining export market shares in 2013. 
. Efforts to address the high levels of non-
performing loans are bearing fruit, and 
acute banking problems have been tackled. 
The number of new non-performing loans has 
declined to pre-crisis levels and the stock has 
decreased markedly over the recent period. 
Yet, it remains high compared to EU peers and 
continues to weigh on banks’ profitability and 
on their ability to raise capital internally and to 
efficiently (re)allocate it to the most productive 
firms. Building on adopted measures — like 
the guarantee scheme to support NPL 
securitisations — the pursuit of further efforts 
could help to address the remaining 
vulnerabilities. The reform of the insolvency 
framework, in particular, is yet to be finalised. 
. Long-term and youth unemployment pose 
risks to social cohesion and growth. Although 
declining, both remain among the highest in the 
EU, also as a consequence of Italy's protracted 
recession. The low overall activity rate is 
constraining potential output growth. At the 
same time, the high level of youth 
unemployment can hinder young people's 
acquisition of skills and future employability. 


Other key economic issues analysed in this report 
that point to challenges for Italy are the following: 

. A high tax burden and low tax compliance 
continue to hold back economic growth. 
Despite extended tax incentives to promote 
employment and investment, Italy’s tax burden 
on labour and capital remains among the 
highest in the EU. Efforts to shift it to property 
and consumption are still limited. The 
complexity of the tax code increases the burden 
on compliant firms and households and reduces 
tax compliance. Recent measures to tackle 
these problems, including broader compulsory 
electronic invoicing, are promising. Yet, the 
long-awaited revision of tax expenditures and 
cadastral values has been further postponed. 
The abolition of job vouchers has not given 
way to alternative strategic approaches to 
combat undeclared work. 
. Investment is still subdued, in particular in 
intangible assets. Since the crisis, investment 
declined sharply and has not yet returned to its 
2007 level. Despite the adoption in 2017 of an 
ambitious investment plan in infrastructure, 
notably in transport, investment is still held 
back by structural factors. These include 
financial constraints related to underdeveloped 
capital markets, impaired bank-lending and 
lack of high-skilled people also due to brain 
drain and limited lifelong learning. The 



business environment is still unfavourable to 
investment despite ongoing policies such as the 
‘Industria 4.0’ to promote business investment. 
Investment in ‘intangible’ assets such as R&D, 
innovation and training of workers remains 
below the EU average due to the large number 
of micro-firms, Italy's lack of specialisation in 
knowledge-intensive sectors, limited 
digitisation and digital skills. Moreover, public 
spending in R&D has been reduced. 
. ‘Second-level’ wage bargaining is not 
widespread and the implementation of the 
active labour market policies (ALMPs) 
reform is delayed. Despite recent labour 
market reforms, limited use of ‘second-level’ 
wage bargaining — at regional, sectoral or 
company level — may weaken the link 
between wage levels and local economic 
conditions, thereby reducing competitiveness. 
Moreover, while a dedicated agency to reform 
ALMPs was set up in 2017, the governance of 
the system remains weak and no strategic plan 
has been adopted yet. The annual reports on the 
implementation of the Jobs Act provisions on 
ALMPs, envisaged by the law, have not been 
published yet. 
. New social policies are being implemented to 
tackle rising poverty, while demographic 
challenges remain. The rate of people at risk 
of poverty or social exclusion in Italy is high, 
especially for children, temporary workers and 
migrants. In response, the design of a new 
permanent scheme to tackle poverty represents 
a major breakthrough, which could also help 
reinforce so far understaffed social services. 
Moreover, Italy’s low fertility rate, ageing 
population and worsened migration balance 
raise medium-term challenges. These require 
the development of long term strategies such as 
better targeted family-support policies. The 
proportion of women participating in the labour 
market remains in fact one of the lowest in the 
EU. The main reasons include the difficulty of 
reconciling work with family care due to the 
limited availability of affordable childcare and 
long-term care services, low take-up of parental 
leave by men and the weak incentives offered 
by certain aspects of the tax and benefits 
system. The currently fragmented system of 
bonuses to support families appears to be 
ineffective in addressing these challenges. 
. The education system is underfunded. Italy’s 
early school leaving rate remains above the EU 
average and wide regional disparities persist in 
educational attainment despite an overall 
improvement in the quality of schooling. High 
dropout rates and a comparatively long 
duration of studies contribute to low tertiary 
education attainment rates. Despite these 
challenges, the share of public expenditure in 
education continued its downward trend. 
. Efforts were made in 2017 to reform the 
public administration, judicial system and 
anti-corruption framework. Yet, the 
functioning of the public administration and the 
management of public employment are still 
less efficient than in peer countries. Challenges 
persist in the management and rationalisation 
of publicly-owned enterprises. The length of 
civil justice proceedings remains worrying 
especially at higher instances, where the 
effectiveness of past reforms to prevent abuses 
of the trial remains uncertain and case 
management can still be improved. Moreover, 
while Italy strengthened its regulatory 
framework to fight corruption, challenges still 
remain in terms of its implementation. 
. The business environment continues to 
hinder entrepreneurship, and significant 
barriers to competition remain. Some sectors 
are still over-regulated, including professional 
services, local public services and transport. 
The lack of competitive processes to award 
public service contracts and concessions for 
access to public goods negatively impact 
service quality, especially in the transport 
sector. Timely implementation of the 2015 
competition law and the removal of the 
remaining restrictions to competition could 
help a more efficient allocation of resources 
and improve productivity. The low quality of 
public administrations and the great regional 
variation in their responsiveness to business 
needs have a negative impact on the business 
environment and limit firms' ability to exploit 
innovation opportunities. The benefits of the 
public procurement reform will depend on its 
timely completion and consistent application. 



