After a long contraction, growth is expected to turn positive in 2015 but remains well below the EU average and the public debt-to-GDP ratio is set to increase further. Inflation is projected to turn negative due to the fall in oil prices. Unemployment remains historically high and domestic demand is weak. Increasing global demand, a lower euro and falling oil prices could support economic growth in the future. Current account surplus is expected to strengthen slightly. The government deficit is set to reach 3 % of GDP in 2014 and to decrease in 2015 and 2016. Italy's public debt-to-GDP ratio is expected to peak in 2015 at 133 % of GDP based on the Commission 2015 winter forecast. The current low growth and inflation outlook pose a challenge to its reduction.     In March 2014, the Commission concluded that Italy was experiencing excessive macroeconomic imbalances requiring specific monitoring and strong policy action. This Country Report assesses ItalyÕs economy against the background of the Commission's Annual Growth Survey which recommends three main pillars for the EU's economic and social policy in 2015: investment, structural reforms, and fiscal responsibility. In line with the Investment Plan for Europe, it also explores ways to maximise the impact of public resources and unlock private investment. Finally, it assesses Italy in the light of the findings of the Alert Mechanism Report published on 28 November 2014, in which the Commission found it useful to examine further the persistence of imbalances or their unwinding. The main findings of the in-depth review contained in this Country Report are: . Persistently low productivity growth continues to perpetuate Italy's macroeconomic imbalances, namely the very high level of public debt and the weak external competitiveness. ItalyÕs real GDP has fallen to the early 2000s levels, while the euro area GDP is more than 10 % higher. The poor performance of total factor productivity accounts for most of the difference and is at the root of ItalyÕs declining competitiveness, while the low growth weighs on the sustainability of the public debt. Structural reforms Ñ implemented and foreseen Ñ should reduce public debt-to-GDP ratio and improve competitiveness through their positive impact on productivity and GDP. Strong commitment to these reforms is crucial, also in the light of ItalyÕs past record marked by important implementation gaps. . The very high government debt remains a heavy burden for the Italian economy and a major source of vulnerability, especially in a context of protracted weak growth. The fiscal adjustment and easing in market conditions have helped avert immediate sustainability risks. Past pension reforms should have a beneficial effect in the medium-to-long-term. However, public debt projections show that strong growth-friendly consolidation, sustained nominal growth and ambitious structural reforms are key to a substantial debt reduction.  . Italy's competitiveness has not improved yet: sluggish productivity growth continues to push up unit labour costs, while non-cost factors remain unfavourable. ItalyÕs export competitiveness remains weak. Unit labour costs have been rising relative to trade partners, driven by the slow productivity growth. ItalyÕs product specialisation and high share of small firms with a weak competitive position in international markets further hamper its competitiveness.  . The protracted crisis has exposed the risks inherent in the Italian banking sectorÕs close relationship with the domestic corporate sector and the sovereign. Corporate non-performing loan ratio has increased to just over 27 %. Bank credit to corporates continues to contract, driven by weak demand and tight supply to SMEs with a high credit risk. Italy has taken several measures to reform the banking sector and diversify firmsÕ funding sources. The banking sectorÕs exposure to domestic government bonds is likely to remain high, and so its vulnerability to unfavourable market developments in the Italian sovereign debt market. . Investment was particularly hard hit during the crisis aggravating the long-run deterioration in its quality. Since the crisis, productive investment in Italy has declined significantly and it is now 1.5% below the EU average as a share of GDP. The decline in the amount of investment is compounded by a long-term deterioration in its quality.  . The Italian economyÕs size makes it a potentially important source of spillovers to other Member States while its recovery depends on propitious external conditions. The trade, financial and bank funding links harbour the potential to cause spillovers in other EU countries. At the same time, external demand and the inflation environment are paramount to ItalyÕs export-led recovery, the debt-to-GDP reduction effort and to recovering competitiveness.  The Country Report also analyses other macroeconomic and structural issues and the main findings are: . Weaknesses in public administration and justice system hamper the quality of the business environment and reduce the capacity to implement reforms effectively. Despite marginal improvements, inefficiencies in the public administration and justice remain. According to several national and international sources, corruption is high.  . Lack of competition in product markets, infrastructure gaps and low spending on research on development, particularly in the business sector, are hampering productivity growth. Restrictions on competition and infrastructure bottlenecks in important sectors of the economy remain present, while a very high number of inefficient companies owned by local authorities weigh on the countryÕs public finances and economic performance. Investment in research and innovation is low.  . Labour market participation remains low and active labour market policies are weak. The participation of women, although growing, remains among the lowest in the EU. Youth unemployment has increased dramatically with the crisis. Employment services do not match the supply of labour to demand satisfactorily.  . The Italian education system continues to suffer from long-standing problems. The early school-leaving rate is well above the EU average and school education in Italy produces mixed results in terms of skills attainment.  . The taxation system hinders economic efficiency. The tax burden on labour has been reduced considerably in the past year but remains high. Tax compliance is low and time-consuming, posing risks to the level playing field in the market and to the fairness of burden sharing. . Social and regional disparities are growing wider. Poverty and social exclusion have greatly increased while the social protection system is fragmented and fails to address these challenges properly. The southern regions have suffered a sharper fall in employment due to their long-standing structural weaknesses.  Overall, Italy has made some progress in addressing the 2014 recommendations. A significant shift of the tax burden away from labour has been undertaken. The ongoing reform of the labour market has a potential to address long-standing rigidities and improve the allocation of labour resources. Some progress has been made to improve the education system as well as the governance and resilience of the banking sector. Initial steps have been taken to streamline institutions and administration. A draft law for competition has been adopted by the government in February 2015. However, progress has been much more limited, and sometimes delayed, in several areas. The spending review is not yet part of regular budgeting procedures, and the privatisation programme also incurred delays in 2014. Only limited progress has been made in addressing corruption and infrastructure bottlenecks.  The Country Report shows the policy challenges stemming from the analysis of macroeconomic imbalances. Italy's main challenges regard growth-friendly fiscal consolidation and the implementation of structural reforms to improve productivity growth. Other challenges concern infrastructure bottlenecks, the efficiency of the tax system and the efficiency of the public administration, including justice. 