EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  Following a slowdown in 2014, LatviaÕs  for young people and the long-term  economic growth is expected to pick up again,  unemployed. However, young people with low  reaching 2.9% in 2015 and 3.6% in 2016.  levels of education and no work experience  Latvia's pattern is highly sensitive to external  remain in a challenging situation. The coverage  developments, where the risks are on the  of active labour market measures remains too  downside. Domestic demand is projected to be the  low and a career guidance system remains  key growth driver in 2015-16. Unemployment is  weak. Under-financing of the health care  estimated to fall from around 11% in 2014 to 9.2%  system hinders access to healthcare for  in 2016 amid some rebound in labour demand.  vulnerable groups.  Wages grew by an estimated 7% in 2014. General  government deficit is projected to remain low at  ¥  On education, skills, science and innovation,  around 1% of GDP in 2015 and 2016. Public debt  Latvia intends to introduce an internationally. is projected to decline to 35.5% of GDP in 2016.   recognised higher education accreditation  system, implement a financing model that  This Country Report assesses Latvia's economy  rewards quality, promote internationalisation,  against the background of the Commission's  and increase the proportion of university  Annual Growth Survey which recommends three  graduates in science, technology, engineering  main pillars for the EU's economic and social  and mathematics. On vocational education and  policy in 2015: investment, structural reforms, and  training, quality and offer of apprenticeships is  fiscal responsibility. In line with the Investment  not sufficient. In science and innovation, steps  Plan for Europe, it also explores ways to maximise  are being taken to target funding to research  the impact of public resources and unlock private  institutions that are internationally competitive.  investment. The Report reviews the policy  LatviaÕs business R&D intensity is one of the  response since mid-2014, notably as regards the  lowest in the EU: together with insufficient  country-specific recommendations issued by the  policies to foster cooperation between science  Council in July 2014. The main observations and  and businesses, this is hindering the  findings of the analysis are:  development of knowledge-driven economy.  ¥ On fiscal policy and taxation, a high tax  ¥  On energy independence and efficiency,  wedge for low-income earners remains a  Latvia has fully opened its electricity retail  disincentive for the formal employment and  market. However, electricity connections with  reduces demand for low-skilled workers. The  Estonia are inadequate and challenges remain  tax revenue potential of environmental and  to ensure the smooth functioning of the  property taxes has not been used sufficiently.  regional electricity market. Latvia's gas market  Measures for improving tax compliance have  liberalisation and transmission system operator  high prominence in the 2015 budget, but the  unbundling is to be completed by 2017.  level of tax avoidance is still high. Further  Important regulatory and ownership issues  plans for increasing the tax ratio to GDP are  need to be dealt with in advance of the  not well articulated. Medium-term expenditure  deadline. Latvia has delayed implementation of  plans assume limited resources or even  the EU energy efficiency scheme and energy  discontinuation of some public services,  and carbon intensity is significantly higher than  putting their credibility at risk in the face of  the EU average, particularly in the household  mounting spending pressures.  and transport sectors.  ¥ On social policy, labour activation and  ¥  As for the judiciary and public  healthcare, reforms to social assistance  administration, there has been substantial  benefits have not advanced, although a  progress on mediation and arbitration  significant amount of analytical and planning  frameworks. However civil, criminal and  work has been undertaken. Social expenditure  commercial proceedings in lower courts are  has a limited impact on poverty reduction in  still too long, especially in corruption-linked  Latvia due to overall low levels of spending  cases, and there are loopholes in the application  and the dominance of insurance-based benefits.  of insolvency law. The state-owned enterprise  Labour market outcomes have improved both  management reform has finally been adopted;  however, there is uncertainty about the timing  decision making on spending priorities and  and the ambition to adopt the necessary  progression of structural reforms.   secondary legislation. The quality and  capacities of public administration are affected  ¥  There is room to improve the supply of skills  by relatively low remuneration levels,  to increase labour productivity. Higher  especially for senior staff. Proposed measures  education suffers from inadequate public  to strengthen the institutional and financial  funding and a lack of impartial study field  independence of the Competition Council have  accreditation. There is a lack of attractiveness  been insufficient.   for the vocational education and  apprenticeships. Not properly targeted public  ¥ Latvia's level of investment is low,  funding to internationally competitive  particularly in the energy and transport  institutions negatively affects research and  infrastructure sector. Low investment can  innovation system outcomes.   reduce competitiveness and growth potential,  weighing on productivity and capacity to  ¥  Important challenges are the capacity of the  produce jobs.   social safety net, the access to healthcare for  vulnerable groups and a sufficient labour  Overall, Latvia has made some progress in  supply. The social safety net is not sufficiently  addressing the country-specific  strong, pension adequacy is at risk and the  recommendations issued by the Council in 2014.  financing and coverage of active labour  The reform process has regained momentum since  measures is inappropriate. On health, waiting  the parliamentary elections. The parliament has  times for diagnostics are high, there is a lack of  passed into law a number of important bills left  sickness prevention and health promotion, and  over from the previous parliament, most notably  the health care workforce strategy is not yet  on construction, public procurement, insolvency,  implemented.   state-owned enterprise management and the Single  Development Institution. The authorities have  ¥  For the full opening of the gas market from  taken action to improve the judiciary, to intensify  April 2017, regulatory and ownership issues  the fight against tax avoidance, and to target  would need to be settled over the coming  science funding towards internationally  months, in order to ensure predictability and a  competitive institutions. The electricity market was  smooth transition. Implementation of the EU  fully liberalised in January 2015. Limited progress  energy efficiency scheme relies on rolling out  was made on reforming social assistance and  ambitious energy efficiency projects in  tackling inadequate healthcare access. Some  buildings, heating systems, and low-carbon  progress was made on implementing higher  transport.  education and science reforms and improving the  availability of quality work-based training.   ¥  Time needed to resolve administrative, civil  and commercial cases is excessively long.  The Country Report reveals the policy challenges  The role of the Judicial Council in  stemming from the analysis, namely:  implementing judicial reforms is not strong  enough. The state-owned enterprise  ¥ Labour tax reforms are not sufficiently  management reform is not complete, a public  targeted at reducing the high tax wedge on  administration reforms is not planned the  low-income earners. Property and  capacities of the Competition Council are not  environment taxes have a potential to support a  sufficiently strong.  growth-friendly tax shift away from labour  taxation.  ¥ The credibility of the medium-term  budgetary plans is hampered as revenue and  expenditure measures are not spelled out.  Lack of clarity on revenue plans affects timely  