EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 



Latvia currently enjoys strong economic growth 
and it has undertaken a number of reforms in 
key areas. Latvia's economy is on overall strong 
footing with solid productivity growth, but rapid 
wage growth carries some risks. Latvia has 
implemented a major tax reform and is pursuing 
reforms in other key areas like healthcare, 
education and public administration. While these 
reforms aim to address some of the key challenges 
identified in this report, their effectiveness varies. 
At the same time, the rapidly shrinking population 
is weighing heavily on labour supply and the 
efficiency of public services. Moreover, the high 
inequality and a number of social challenges 
reflect the weak social protection in Latvia (1). 

(1) This report assesses Latvia’s economy in the light of the 
European Commission’s Annual Growth Survey published 
on 22 November 2017. In the survey, the Commission calls 
on EU Member States to implement reforms to make the 
European economy more productive, resilient and 
inclusive. In so doing, Member States should focus their 
efforts on the three elements of the virtuous triangle of 
economic policy — boosting investment, pursuing 
structural reforms and ensuring responsible fiscal policies. 

 

An improving external outlook coupled with 
recovering investment has pushed Latvia’s real 
GDP growth above 4% in 2017. Real GDP 
growth is forecast to have reached 4.5 %, double 
the 2016 figure and the highest GDP growth since 
2011 thanks to the recovery of investments, the 
more favourable external outlook and continued 
strong private consumption growth. Growth is 
expected to ease off to 3.5% in 2018 and 3.2% in 
2019 once the initial boost from the investment 
recovery has passed. Exports and private 
consumption are expected to continue their strong 
performance, although these will be increasingly 
held back by accelerating inflation and labour 
shortages. 

While unemployment is steadily decreasing, 
employment growth is becoming constrained by 
the falling labour supply. Driven by the shrinking 
labour force and, to some extent, economic 
growth, the unemployment rate continued to 
decline to 8.7 % in 2017. A rapidly rising number 
of vacancies, reported labour shortages and a 
strong increase in wages signal a tightening of the 
labour market. Employment remained practically 
unchanged while wage growth continued to 
increase further, reaching nearly 10% in the first 
three quarters of 2017, also partly due to an 

increase in the minimum wage. Wage growth has 
been more or less uniform across skill levels, but 
large regional differences and skill-level gaps in 
employment opportunities exist. The large 
difference between the net income of low-wage 
earners and the total cost for employers (‘the high 
tax wedge’) is dampening labour supply while the 
lack of affordable housing makes it hard for people 
to move to find work. 

The population decline increasingly weighs on 
the efficiency of several areas of the economy 
and social policy. Latvia’s population has been 
falling since the early 1990s, caused by a negative 
natural change and sizeable emigration. Over the 
past decade, however, the pace of decline has 
intensified due to a further increase in emigration. 
Besides weighing on the supply of labour, the 
falling population is putting a strain on public 
resources for social and health services. The 
negative effect of this dynamic is also becoming 
apparent in education and public utilities as fewer 
users of the existing infrastructure make their use 
more expensive. 

Productivity growth in Latvia has been solid 
since the crisis, but the easy gains of catching 
up are over. Since 2010 annual productivity 
growth in Latvia has been 2.4% on average, among 
the highest in the EU. However, it has more than 
halved compared to what it was during the fast 
catching-up process before the crisis. The 
structurally lower investment rate suggests that 
there is no low hanging fruit left and that the 
country’s growth model will need to change by 
shifting the focus to climbing the global value 
chains. However, weak innovation performance, 
average education outcomes and a diminishing 
talent pool due to emigration raise concerns about 
the economy’s ability to expand its share of 
knowledge-intensive activities. 

Despite some recent improvements, persistently 
high inequality and poverty reflect the 
weakness of the social safety net and the design 
of the tax and benefit system. While 
progressivity of labour taxation has been recently 
improved, its impact on reducing inequality is 
expected to remain negligible. Poverty and 
inequality remain high, notably due to the low 
spending on social protection which is directly 
linked to low tax revenue as a share of GDP. 
Although poverty among children has decreased 


considerably over the past 5 years, poverty risk for 
the elderly has worsened, largely because pensions 
have not kept pace with economic growth. Future 
pension adequacy is also a concern due to a rapidly 
rising old-age dependency ratio. 

A major tax reform leaves little room for 
discretionary spending in other areas. While 
the cost of the tax reform is expected to weigh on 
the fiscal position in 2018-2019, the government 
deficit is set to remain at around 1% of GDP. At 
the same time, the intention to stick to the current 
tax policy for the coming three years will limit the 
available public resources for crucial needs in 
healthcare and social assistance. 

Latvia has made some progress in addressing 
the 2017 country-specific recommendations. 
Some progress was recorded on reducing the tax 
wedge on low-income earners and on improving 
tax compliance. Some progress was also made as a 
result of setting efficiency targets for central 
government, by increasing the provision of public 
healthcare services and by updating vocational 
education curriculum. However, progress has been 
limited on preventing conflict of interest in public 
administration and on improving the adequacy of 
the social safety net. 

As for progress in reaching the national targets 
under the Europe 2020 strategy, Latvia has 
attained its employment rate target, early school 
leaving, tertiary education attainment and poverty 
reduction targets in 2016 and is performing well on 
renewable energy, energy efficiency, reducing 
greenhouse gas emissions. More effort is needed 
on R&D investment. 

Latvia faces challenges with regard to a number 
of indicators of the Social Scoreboard 
supporting the European Pillar of Social Rights. 
High economic growth has translated into 
improved employment outcomes. However, 
income inequality and poverty remain relatively 
high, in part due to the weaknesses in the social 
protection system. Access to healthcare and decent 
housing is limited and social housing is scarce. 
Participation in active labour market policies 
remains low. On the positive side, the gender 
employment gap is very low and gross disposable 
household income per capita is increasing. 

The main findings of the analysis contained in this 
report, and the related policy challenges, are as 
follows: 

. Tax cuts are expected to provide 
employment and investment incentives, but 
restrict resources for public services. Labour 
taxation is being made more progressive by 
reducing the tax wedge on low wages, although 
a gap with the EU average remains. Changes to 
the taxation of capital give entrepreneurs an 
incentive to retain the profits and the 
government expects this will boost investment. 
However, the tax cuts are only partly 
compensated by increases in excise duties and 
improving the tax administration, thereby 
reducing the tax revenue as a share of GDP. As 
a result, resources for public services remain 
restricted, in particular for pressing needs in 
healthcare and social assistance. At the same 
time, the revenue potential of property taxation 
remains underused. 
. The education system faces a challenge to 
consolidate resources while improving 
quality and efficiency. Access to quality 
education remains dependent on the place of 
residence and type of school. The decline in 
student numbers calls for fewer schools and 
teachers, which would allow for higher teacher 
salaries and specialisation. At the same time, a 
competences-based general education 
curriculum is set to be rolled out from 2018. 
This is intended to align skills with future 
labour market needs. The target for vocational 
education is to increase its share of students by 
offering them better work opportunities and 
gradually updating the curriculum. At the 
moment, participation in vocational education 
and adult learning is relatively low. 
. Facilitating labour market inclusion of 
the long-term unemployed remains difficult, 
notably in rural areas. Active labour market 
policies rely on EU funding and are expected to 
increase, but their coverage is still lagging 
behind other EU countries. Regional mobility, 
particularly to Riga, is impeded by limited 
availability of quality rental accommodations 
and because Riga is excluded from 
the mobility-benefit scheme. There has been a 
greater effort to reach young people neither in 



employment, education or training and to help 
the long-term unemployed get jobs, but this 
remains a complex task. 
. Adequacy of social benefits remains low and 
results in a high proportion of people at risk 
of poverty and still high income inequalities. 
The social safety net is insufficient to provide 
for the basic subsistence needs. The large 
number of low-wage earners and widespread 
underreporting of wages mean that a sizable 
part of the population has only minimal social 
coverage. Ambitious government plans to raise 
the minimum income level have not been 
implemented due to a lack of funding. Instead, 
the guaranteed minimum income has been 
increased marginally. Also, despite some 
increases in the lowest pensions, ensuring their 
adequacy remains a challenge. Moreover, the 
social protection of people with disabilities 
remains very weak. 
. The increase in healthcare financing is 
expected to satisfy some of the critical needs 
but newly adopted access restrictions risk 
worsening health outcomes. The country's 
poor health outcomes are linked to the low 
public financing of healthcare and lower 
efficiency than in other countries. Prioritising 
resources for health in 2018 and 2019 is 
expected to expand access to services. 
However, public spending plans for 2020 
remain well below the EU average and reforms 
to boost efficiency have only just started. State-
funded health services are set to be linked to 
the payment of social contributions from 2019. 
Population groups excluded from the full 
access to public services can opt-in by making 
voluntary health contributions. As a result, part 
of population stand to lose access to the full 
basket of healthcare services. 
. Rapidly rising labour costs raise some 
concerns about Latvia’s price 
competitiveness. Despite rapid wage growth, 
Latvia has continued to gain export market 
shares. Crucially, unlike during the period 
leading up to the 2009 economic crisis, the 
current account has, on average, remained 
close to balance. The falling labour supply 
appears to be the main driver of wage growth, 
which in turn may have a positive effect by 
containing emigration. While the risks are 
limited so far, they highlight the importance of 
policy measures to increase labour supply. 
. Latvia's productivity growth has been solid, 
but its innovation performance is average. A 
favourable macroeconomic environment and 
pressures from the falling working-age 
population have helped productivity growth in 
Latvia. However, the low investments in R&D, 
the overall weak innovation performance and 
average education outcomes undermine 
Latvia’s pursuit of higher productivity through 
specialisation in knowledge-intensive 
activities. 
. Latvia has taken steps to reduce the burden 
of energy subsidies on electricity consumers 
but challenges remain. In response to the high 
and rising costs of energy subsidies, Latvia 
phased-out the support paid to the state-owned 
energy company which accounted for around 
half of the entire subsidy cost. Moreover, it has 
also sought to increase the competitiveness of 
large industrial consumers by lowering their 
electricity price, which is among the highest in 
EU. However, challenges remain over the 
efficiency of the electricity network (partly due 
to the population decline) and achieving better 
cost effectiveness in renewable energy support. 
. Latvia's business environment is generally 
favourable, although the judicial system and 
public procurement continue to pose 
challenges. Overall, Latvia scores high on 
international business environment rankings, 
standing out for its well-developed IT 
infrastructure, online services and access to 
credit. It does less well in insolvency process 
and public procurement. While the specific 
weaknesses of the insolvency framework that 
allowed for major abuses of the process have 
been addressed, trust in the judiciary remains 
relatively low. Furthermore, there are 
challenges with respect to competitiveness and 
transparency of the public procurement 
process. 
. The upcoming public administration reform 
aims at increasing the quality and efficiency 
of the central administration. This is 
expected to be achieved by centralising 



administrative support functions and cutting 
back administrative procedures and regulations. 
However, local authorities and state owned-
enterprises are outside the scope of the reform, 
limiting its overall effectiveness. 
. Corruption remains a challenge for 
the business environment, but strengthening 
functional independence of the anti-
corruption office is a positive step. Based on 
the surveys, corruption is still considered to be 
more widespread than in some other EU 
countries, but the share of businesses pointing 
to it being an obstacle for doing business is 
decreasing. The in-fighting in the anti-
corruption office in the previous years 
weakened its efficiency, which is expected to 
be resolved by recent organisational changes. 
Nevertheless, the delay in legislating on 
whistle-blower protection is detrimental to 
improving the accountability and efficiency of 
public administration. 



