EXECUTIVE SUMMARY Despite increased external risks, Lithuania is expected to continue to achieve solid growth in the short term. Lithuania showed remarkable adjustment capacity in the wake of the financial crisis. Its regained competitiveness has supported solid growth in recent years, which averaged around 3.3% per year from 2012 to 2014. This was initially led by exports, but domestic demand has now taken over as the main growth engine. It is expected that domestic demand growth will carry its momentum into 2015, largely driven by rising wages, falling unemployment and subdued inflation. For 2015, Lithuania’s real GDP is expected to grow by 3.0%, according to the European Commission 2015 winter forecast. Unemployment is set to further continue its downward trend to 8.7% in 2015. However, despite the solid gains in employment, structural challenges persist, particularly demographic ones. As regard the external environment, growth in the EU is expected to remain weak and downside risks persist as geopolitical tensions between Russia and the EU mount. This Country Report assesses Lithuania’s economy against the background of the Commission’s Annual Growth Survey which recommends three main pillars for the EU’s economic and social policy in 2015: investment, structural reforms, and fiscal responsibility. In line with the Investment Plan for Europe, it also explores ways to maximise the impact of public resources and unlock private investment. The main observations and findings of the analysis are: • The tax system has not exploited the scope available for the use of growth friendly taxes. Tax revenue is to a large extent dependent on indirect and labour taxation, while the percentage of revenue contributed by environmental or wealth taxation remains very low. There are some risks to the sustainability of the current pension system as it does not adequately take into account the effects of a shrinking and ageing population. • The working age population is shrinking rapidly, possibly slowing down potential growth. Population decline is due to negative demographic developments but aggravated by net emigration and poor health outcomes as illustrated by low life expectancy and high morbidity rates. Coverage of active labour market policies remains low and focuses still too much on less effective measures. Young people still face some difficulties to integrate into the labour market. • The Lithuanian labour market has to a large extent proven its flexibility. Nevertheless, the legislation on employment protection is outdated. High redundancy payments and long notification periods have led to weak enforcement and overall governance of labour relations. Social dialogue mechanisms are weak. • The population at risk of poverty and social exclusion in Lithuania remains high. With more than 30% of its population being at risk, Lithuania ranks among the worst performers in the EU in this respect. Although the situation has improved somewhat in recent years, the poor overall situation raises concerns about the adequacy of the Lithuania’s social measures. • Lithuania has enjoyed easy gains from catching-up thanks to relatively cheap, but qualified labour and the adaptation of existing technology. However, these are set to come to an end. Skills shortages have emerged and are expected to become more acute in the future. In addition, the education and training on offer is not always relevant to the labour market which may negatively affect the quality of the labour force.  • Private sector investment, in particular into research and innovation is low, which may have negative repercussions for long-term growth. Lack of alternative financing sources hinders investment into riskier projects, as banks tend to be risk averse. • Lithuania will need to continue to work on ensuring security of energy supply and competition on its energy market. Several projects have been launched, and some have already been implemented, but more progress is needed. Energy-intensity in Lithuania is high making it one of the least energy-efficient countries in the EU. Lithuania’s high energy intensity continues to fuel energy imports, partially offsetting recent Executive summary efforts to boost energy security. In addition, Lithuania is likely to miss its Europe 2020 greenhouse gas emission targets. Overall, Lithuania has made some progress in addressing the country-specific recommendations. As regards the recommended strengthening of the budgetary strategy and review of the tax system, some minor revenue-increasing measures have been adopted. Lithuania has transposed the Fiscal Compact into national law, but its fiscal framework still has room for improvement: in particular, binding expenditure ceilings are yet to be implemented. Relatively minor measures have been adopted for the recommended comprehensive pension reform, but these fall short of addressing the medium-term challenge of pension system sustainability. On social protection and labour market policy, the government is considering a number of relevant policies but these have not yet been adopted. Initial steps have been taken to accelerate housing renovation in order to increase energy efficiency. Lithuania has made some progress on upgrading its energy infrastructure. It has opened the first liquefied natural gas terminal in the Baltic States, and its continuing efforts to improve its gas and electricity interconnections with its neighbouring states will further strengthen energy supply security. Finally, Lithuania has made substantial progress on reforming state-owned enterprises and has enacted respective legislation to ensure that the effects of the reform are lasting. Therefore, the reform of state-owned enterprises may be considered almost complete. 