EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 



Lithuania is experiencing a strong economic 
upswing and is using this opportunity to make 
growth more inclusive. It has implemented 
reforms in some key policy areas, like labour 
relations and pensions, and started taking steps 
towards strengthening the social safety nets and 
reforming the education sector. However, high 
income inequality and poverty remain a major 
challenge. A strong labour market is underpinning 
consumption and economic growth but at the same 
time labour shortages are raising concerns about 
the sustainability of public finances and economic 
growth in the long-term perspective. Demographic 
trends are negative due to strong emigration, and 
are aggravated by bad health outcomes. In this 
context, achieving inclusive growth, raising 
investment, especially in human capital, and 
boosting productivity and labour supply remain 
key challenges for Lithuania. (1) 

(1) This report assesses Lithuania’s economy in the light of the 
European Commission’s Annual Growth Survey published 
on 22 November 2017. In the survey, the Commission calls 
on EU Member States to implement reforms to make the 
European economy more productive, resilient and 
inclusive. In so doing, Member States should focus their 
efforts on the three elements of the virtuous triangle of 
economic policy — boosting investment, pursuing 
structural reforms and ensuring responsible fiscal policies. 

Economic growth has been rapidly gaining 
momentum. It is estimated to have reached 3.8 % 
for 2017. The boost came from a substantial rise in 
exports, thanks to a favourable external 
environment and a rebound in private investment. 
At the same time, consumption was supported by 
significant wage increases and strong credit 
growth, but was tempered by rising inflation which 
reduced disposable income. In 2018 and 2019, 
growth is expected to moderate to 2.9 % and 2.6 % 
respectively, as continued support from 
investment, also linked to the pick-up in EU funds 
absorption, is expected to be somewhat offset by a 
slowdown in exports and private consumption. 

The employment rate is at a record high, and 
unemployment continues to fall. The 
employment rate is above the EU average and 
stands at 75.7 % in the third quarter of 2017, while 
unemployment has decreased, falling to 7.2 % in 
2017. Youth unemployment has more than halved 
since the crisis, dropping to 13.2 %, while long-
term unemployment has fallen below 3 %. A 
further drop in unemployment is expected as 
economic conditions improve. However, in 

absolute numbers employment is expected to 
decrease over the next few years because of a fall 
in the working-age population. 

The untapped labour potential could mitigate 
the effect of a shrinking working-age 
population. Lithuania’s population has fallen by 
more than 23 % since the early 1990s, and a 
continued decline of about 1 % annually is 
expected over the coming years. The main reasons 
for this are high net emigration, which rose again 
in 2014-2017, and low life expectancy. At the 
same time, there is still an untapped labour 
potential as activity rates of disabled and low-
skilled people remain low. The continued decline 
in the working-age population and an increasing 
old age population are putting a strain on public 
resources for social and health services and are 
negatively affecting potential economic growth. 

Lithuania's productivity growth has rebounded 
in 2017, alleviating pressures on 
competitiveness. After a period of fast catching-
up, productivity growth has been disappointing 
over the past decade. The slowdown in 
productivity growth was particularly visible in 
manufacturing, but also in market services. As 
wages continued to converge towards the EU 
average, labour costs increased significantly in 
recent years. So far, much of this growth has been 
absorbed by companies’ profit margins and has not 
reduced external competitiveness. However, in 
2017, there was a rebound in productivity growth. 
This momentum will need to be preserved in order 
to keep the economy competitive amidst persistent 
upward wage pressures. 

Lithuania continues to run a sound fiscal policy. 
In 2017, for the second year running, the general 
government achieved a budget surplus. This was 
supported by robust tax collection in the context of 
a strong economic performance. Public debt 
remains low at around 40 % of GDP. Recent 
reforms of the pension system seem to have 
improved Lithuania’s long-term fiscal 
sustainability, but risks remain due to uncertainties 
surrounding the adequacy of pensions. 

Lithuania has made some progress in 
addressing the 2017 country-specific 
recommendations. It has taken some steps to 
improve tax compliance. However, the progress 
with broadening the tax base to sources that are 


less detrimental to growth has been limited. 
Lithuania has implemented reforms to improve the 
sustainability of the pension system, but pensions 
remain inadequate and there are concerns that they 
might decrease further in the future. Lithuania has 
also taken some measures to address skills 
shortages, but progress in rewarding quality in 
teaching and higher education, as well as in 
improving the performance of the healthcare 
system, was limited. In addition, Lithuania took 
some important initial steps to improve the social 
safety net. Finally, limited progress has been 
achieved in strengthening productivity by 
improving the efficiency of public investment. 

Regarding progress in reaching the national targets 
under the Europe 2020 strategy, Lithuania reached 
its overall renewable energy target as well as the 
targets regarding the employment rate of the 
working age population, greenhouse gas 
emissions, the share of early school leavers and the 
share of population having attained tertiary 
education. However, more effort is needed to reach 
the energy efficiency target, to increase the share 
of renewable energy in the transport sector, to 
reduce the number of people at risk of poverty or 
social exclusion and to increase expenditure on 
research and development, particularly in the 
private sector. 

Lithuania faces challenges with regard to a 
number of indicators of the Social Scoreboard 
supporting the European Pillar of Social Rights. 
Lithuania's employment rate (almost equal for men 
and women) and growth rate of gross disposable 
household income are high. However, income 
inequality and poverty remain high. This could 
partially be explained by a low effectiveness of 
social transfers on reducing poverty. At the same 
time, health outcomes remain poor, partly due to 
low spending on healthcare. There is room for 
improvement in terms of efficiency and quality of 
education and training. The Lithuanian 
government and the social partners have taken 
some steps to improve the social dialogue. 

Key structural issues analysed in this report, which 
point to particular challenges for Lithuania’s 
economy, are the following: 

. The tax burden on low-income earners has 
been slightly reduced. However, the 
corrective power of the tax system remains 
low and shifting taxation towards sources that 
are less harmful to growth, like environmental 
or property taxes, is limited. Measures taken 
to improve tax compliance and tackle the 
shadow economy are showing first positive 
results, but challenges remain. 
. The long-term sustainability of Lithuania's 
pension system has improved but risks 
remain. The pressures from a shrinking 
working-age population and a rising old-age 
dependency ratio are somewhat mitigated by 
the reforms undertaken in recent years, 
namely the increase of the retirement age 
since 2012 and the introduction of the new 
indexation formula from the beginning of 
2018. However, there are concerns about how 
these reforms will work in practice. This 
particularly relates to preventing the adequacy 
of pensions, which is currently among the 
lowest in the EU, from decreasing further in 
the future. 
. Strengthening of productivity growth is 
imperative to continue the catching-up 
process while preserving competitiveness. 
As wages are expected to continue rising 
above productivity, given their low absolute 
level and the tight labour market, productivity 
increases are essential to maintain 
competitiveness. Knowledge-based activities 
will require upskilling the labour force and 
increasing the uptake of modern technology 
and innovation, especially in the private 
sector.. The strong integration of digital 
technology by businesses and the solid 
support for start-ups are promising for the 
future 
. The efficiency of public R&D expenditure 
and the cooperation between businesses and 
science remain low. Bottlenecks exist in 
public research leading to a low level of return 
on public investment in R&D. Fragmented 
coordination and governance of research and 
innovation policy lead to inefficiencies and 
prevent businesses from fully benefiting from 
the variety of support schemes. Further 
progress in the ongoing reform of the 
organisation and funding of the public 
research sector should help to allow for a 
better use of the available resources. 



. Despite a strong recovery in GDP growth, 
the investment rate remains below the EU 
average. While Lithuania’s business 
environment continues to improve, the 
investment rate has still not recovered. It is 
held back by the lack of a well-qualified 
labour force and a weak innovation 
environment. Investment could also benefit 
from improving the strategic planning and 
efficiency of public investments, increasing 
transparency and competition in public 
procurement, and reducing corruption. 
. Skills shortages pose a growing challenge in 
a tight labour market. The gap between the 
high and the low-skilled in pay and job 
opportunities is large and widening. 
Vulnerable groups, such as people with 
disabilities, are left largely outside the labour 
market. Adult learning remains insufficiently 
developed and the relatively limited coverage 
of active labour market policies means that too 
few low-skilled people are getting the training 
they need. 
. Lithuania’s education system lacks 
efficiency and is not sufficiently responsive 
to labour market needs. Employees’ 
knowledge and skills do not always match 
employers’ needs, even though Lithuania has 
one of the largest shares of 30-34-year-olds 
with a degree in the EU. In higher education, 
the number of teachers and programmes, as 
well as the overall infrastructure, have failed 
to adjust to a falling number of enrolled 
students, which decreased by 16 % between 
2013 and 2016. Low salaries and limited 
opportunities for professional advancement 
make teaching unattractive. 
. Despite recent progress, inequality and 
poverty remain among the highest in the 
EU. This is a result of limited progressivity of 
the tax system, high employment gaps 
between low-skilled and high-skilled workers 
and an inadequate benefit system. The level of 
poverty, in particular among older people, 
disabled, unemployed or single-parent 
households remains well above the EU 
average. The overall spending on social 
protection is low compared to other EU 
countries and low tax revenues limit the 
financial resources available for more 
substantial reforms. The high inequality and 
weak position of low-wage earners is 
exacerbated by weak trade unions and 
significant skills gaps in the labour market. 
. Health outcomes remain relatively poor, 
making the Lithuanian workforce less 
productive. The financial and social cost of 
poor health remains high and is exacerbated 
by low investment in the health sector and the 
slow pace of reforms. A lack of a robust 
framework strengthening accountability, 
especially at municipal level, makes disease 
prevention and health promotion insufficient. 
The health system is too hospital-centric and 
measures to improve the quality of hospital 
and primary care are too scarce to tackle 
effectively and efficiently the health 
challenges. Finally, high out-of-pocket 
payments and regional disparities continue to 
hinder access to healthcare for society’s most 
vulnerable groups. 



