The financial sector remains Luxembourg's main growth engine. The strength of the sector has allowed the country to create and sustain a generous welfare state without jeopardising public finances, while keeping public debt at a low level. According to the Commission's winter 2015 economic forecast, economic activity is projected to continue expanding this year with GDP growth reaching 2.6%, slightly below the 2014 level. The main contribution to growth will come from domestic demand, notably investment. Unemployment is expected to peak in 2015, before to inch down in 2016, although it remains markedly low compared with the EU average. Concerning public finances, in 2014 the general government surplus is set to have declined marginally to 0.5% of GDP from 0.6% in 2013. In spite of the envisaged fiscal consolidation effort, public finances are expected to deteriorate in 2015, mostly as a result of the VAT revenue shortfall that has followed this year's change in the regulation related to e-commerce. In spite of the 2 percentage points increase in VAT rates that came into effect on 1 January 2015, inflation is set to remain subdued, in line with a negative output gap and the sustained weakening of oil prices. The recently announced quantitative easing decision by the European Central Bank is expected to introduce upward pressure on prices, especially in 2016.  This Country Report assesses Luxembourg's economy against the background of the Commission's Annual Growth Survey which recommends three main pillars for the EU's economic and social policy in 2015: investment, structural reforms, and fiscal responsibility. In line with the Investment Plan for Europe, it also explores ways to maximise the impact of public resources and unlock private investment. The main observations and findings of the analysis are: . Public finances remain sound, underpinned by a strong policy framework. In view of the expected deterioration of the fiscal balance in 2015, the government has embarked on a series of corrective measures, targeting both the expenditure and revenue side, to maintain the country's Medium-Term Objective throughout the programming period. An ambitious fiscal consolidation plan, including VAT rate increases, more rationalised expenditures and other measures, is expected help to improve the state budget by around 2% of GDP during the period 2015-18. Moreover, the recent introduction of a multi-annual framework will contribute to smooth the impact of the economic cycle on public finances and reduce the volatility and exposure of revenues to exogenous factors, such as the evolution of financial markets. While limited progress has been made in the area of pensions, Luxembourg continues to face challenges in terms of the long-term sustainability of its public finances. Although the recent VAT reform is set to at least partially offset the drop in consumption tax revenues from the change in regulation related to e-commerce, there is scope for further broadening the tax base, given the ongoing wide use of reduced rates and for revisiting the currently low taxation on housing property. Finally, there is a potential to raise revenues from alternative growth-friendly sources, including environmental taxation.  . The economy is heavily dependent on the financial sector. Efforts to foster investment in sectors with high gross value added are worth being pursued, in the search for alternative sources of growth. The government is directly promoting investment in high quality infrastructure with the potential to contribute to higher productivity, particularly in the network industry and transport sectors. While the Investment Plan put forward by the new Commission could help in this endeavour, Luxembourg's deteriorating cost competitiveness would need to be reversed. Ensuring that wages evolve in line with productivity would help to improve Luxembourg's external position. Nevertheless, the low level of cooperation between firms and public research institutions and the sharp drop in business R&D intensity (from 1.5% in 2000 to 0.7% in 2013) reveal the current weakness of LuxembourgÕs research and innovation system.  . Despite overall well performing labour markets and high tertiary education attainment rates, employment rates are comparatively low for older workers, women and low-skilled young people. There are institutional obstacles to effective activation policies. Disincentives to work exist largely arising from the 'joint taxation' system and from the design of the social benefit system. Finally, the rate of those at-risk-of-poverty and social exclusion is rising among children, single-parent households and migrants, although from low overall levels.  . Luxembourg is currently not on track in reducing the level of greenhouse gas emissions - in sectors not covered by the EUÕs Emissions Trading System - by 20% between 2005 and 2020. According to the latest projections, however, the country will not achieve that Europe 2020 target, largely because of the cross-country fuel purchase induced by the country's relatively low taxes on petrol and diesel. The government announced that results from a feasibility study on the impact of a reform of energy taxation will be released in the course of 2015. Results from the study could feed in the envisaged general fiscal reform that is currently under preparation. . Overall, Luxembourg has made limited progress in addressing the country-specific recommendations issued by the Council in 2014. Although substantial progress has been achieved as regards the situation of the public finances in the short- to medium-term and in the area of strengthening fiscal governance, there has been limited progress concerning the sustainability of public finances in the long-term. Indeed, the 2012 reform of the pension system was not ambitious enough and age-related liabilities remain a looming risk in the long-term, also in light of stalled progress in long-term care reform. Efforts to reduce unemployment, notably among low-skilled young people, have been intensified and point to some progress in this area. Conversely, progress with raising the employment rate among older workers, including by improving their employability through lifelong learning, has been limited. Finally, Luxembourg has made limited progress in strengthening vocational education by promoting apprenticeship and training. No progress however was made as to the general reform of secondary education. No progress either was made as regards the improvement of cost competitiveness and the reduction of Greenhouse Gas emissions, where a focus on concrete and ambitious measures is still missing.  The Country Report reveals the policy challenges stemming from the analysis, namely: . The long-term sustainability of public finances is threatened by the growth of pension expenditure, despite the recent reform of the system, and by the steady increase in long-term care outlays. A review is only scheduled for 2016.  . The cost competitiveness of the Luxembourg's economy has been eroded over the last decade by nominal unit labour costs rising faster than in trading partners, broadly as a result of stagnating labour productivity and steadily increasing nominal wages. Meanwhile, the heavy reliance of the economy on the financial sector implies an inherent structural risk indicative of the need for economic diversification, including through higher investment in research and development.    . Education outcomes remain unsatisfactory despite high tertiary attainment rates, and alleviating the situation of people with a migrant background and low-skilled young people remains difficult. Labour market supply challenges persist related to institutional factors and to the design of the social benefit system. Also the poverty situation and social exclusion, including housing accessibility for low-income groups, requires attention.  . Luxembourg faces the challenge of transforming itself into a low-carbon and resource-efficient economy. A comprehensive framework of concrete policy measures could help the authorities achieve both environmental and economic targets.  