EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 



Luxembourg’s strong growth momentum offers 
the opportunity to ensure sustainable economic 
growth and improve resilience. Public finances 
are sound and the labour market continues to 
exhibit strong job creation and low unemployment 
rates. Ensuring that labour supply and skill levels 
meet present and future labour market needs might 
improve economic resilience, notably by helping 
to better address the long-term challenge to public 
finances. Luxembourg's economic resilience would 
be further bolstered by improving the private 
sector's engagement in the digital transition. 
Moreover, complementing the current reforms to 
strengthen the banking system with measures that 
avoid the building-up of vulnerabilities in the 
housing market would improve the resilience of 
the economy (1). 

(1) This report assesses Luxembourg’s economy in the light of 
the European Commission’s Annual Growth Survey 
published on 22 November 2017. In the survey, the 
Commission calls on EU Member States to implement 
reforms to make the European economy more productive, 
resilient and inclusive. In so doing, Member States should 
focus their efforts on the three elements of the virtuous 
triangle of economic policy - boosting investment, 
pursuing structural reforms and ensuring responsible fiscal 
policies. 

Luxembourg's economy continues to grow 
healthily. The economy has been performing 
better than the euro area average since 2009. Real 
GDP growth averaged 3.2 % in 2010-2016, 
compared with 1.1 % for the euro area as a whole. 
The outlook for Luxembourg continues to be 
favourable. Growth is projected to have reached 
3.4 % in 2017, after 3.1 % in 2016, and it is 
expected to pick up to 3.9 % in 2018. 

The financial sector remains the main economic 
sector in the country. The sector has remained 
sound and profitable. This is reflected in strong 
surpluses in both the services balance and the 
overall current account balance. The external 
sector relative contribution to real GDP growth 
represented 61 % on average in 2013-2016, despite 
recurrent negative trade balances. In 2016, the 
current account balance posted a surplus of 4.8% 
of GDP. 

Public finances are projected to remain sound. 
The implementation of the tax reform might 
reduce the general government surplus in 2017, 
which reached 1.6% in 2016. In 2018, buoyant 
revenue growth underpinned by strong underlying 

economic expansion is expected to be offset by 
growth in government expenditure, mainly due to 
infrastructure investments. 

Luxembourg has made limited progress in 
addressing the 2017 country-specific 
recommendations. The government has made 
some progress on diversifying the economy. 
Limited progress has been made in removing 
regulatory restrictions in the business services 
sector. Limited progress has been made on limiting 
early retirement and on increasing the employment 
rate of older people. 

Regarding progress in reaching the national targets 
under the Europe 2020 strategy, Luxembourg is on 
track to reach the renewable energy target and the 
energy efficiency target in 2020. However, 
Luxembourg is expected to miss its 2020 target 
reductions in greenhouse gas emissions. Transport 
fuel taxation remains low, stimulating traffic 
congestion and possibly providing incentives to 
increase consumption. Little progress has been 
made towards the targets for R&D investment and 
reducing poverty risk, and the employment rate, 
which remain below target. 

Luxembourg performs relatively well on the 
indicators of the Social Scoreboard supporting 
the European Pillar of Social Rights. 
Unemployment and the share of young people not 
in employment, education or training are low. 
Childcare for very young children is widely used. 
Income inequality and the weakening impact of 
social transfers on poverty merit attention. 

Key structural issues analysed in this report, which 
point to particular challenges for Luxembourg’s 
economy, are the following: 

. Luxembourg has a healthy financial sector, 
for which risks can be assessed as contained. 
The whole economy benefits from the presence 
of a large financial sector. However, 
developments in the financial sector are 
expected to continue having a strong impact on 
the country's economic performance. Potential 
risks can also arise from developments in the 
housing market, which has an impact on 
household indebtedness. The government has 
continued to strengthen the macro prudential 
framework, which is key to ensure the 
resilience of the sector. 



. House prices have kept on rising. This may 
undermine Luxembourg's ability to attract and 
retain a skilled labour force, a large share of 
which is made up of non-nationals. House price 
pressures emerge from both the supply and 
demand side. On the supply side, insufficient 
land availability and lack of incentives for 
private owners to sell land or buildings seem to 
represent a bottleneck to the creation of new 
housing units. On the demand side, high 
population and employment growth, as well as, 
to a lesser extent, tax policies encouraging 
ownership push prices up. 
. The rise of age-related expenditure poses a 
threat to the long-term sustainability of 
public finances. The operational balance of the 
pension system is projected to become negative 
by 2023, with the deficit widening steadily 
over the medium to long term. However, past 
and current surpluses of the pension system 
have been saved. These cumulated reserves are 
projected to extend the viability of the system 
by about a further 20 years. 
. Luxembourg has continued to pursue its 
strategy to diversify the economy, whereas 
business investment in R&D is on a 
declining trend. The authorities took several 
initiatives to deploy the diversification strategy 
and to foster investments in the key priority 
sectors. Among them, important achievements 
concern the ICT and space sectors. By contrast, 
expenditure in R&D remains highly dependent 
from public spending and is not leveraging 
private investments. Therefore, business 
investments in R&D continued to decline, 
indicating that several weaknesses remain in 
the research and innovation ecosystem, which 
drag down Luxembourg's innovation 
performance. 
. The business environment showed some 
improvements, but barriers remain in the 
business services sector. Luxembourg has 
made efforts to simplify administrative 
formalities, but the business services sector is 
still restrictive, notably as regards the 
profession of lawyers. 
. The labour market continues to enjoy strong 
job creation and low unemployment rates, 
but specific groups still face challenges. The 
unemployment rate continues to go down. 
Employment growth has increased in 2017, 
with both cross-border and resident workers 
helping fuel this growth. However, the 
employment rate of older workers remains 
substantially below the EU average. Upskilling 
is crucial, given the strong demand for highly 
specialised skills and several steps have been 
taken in this regard. Getting more low-skilled 
and older workers into training is also 
necessary. 
. Poverty and social exclusion risks are 
increasing but they are still among the 
lowest in the EU. People with migrant 
background tend to have far fewer job and 
social opportunities. Social transfers remain 
essential in lifting people out of poverty, 
although their capacity to reduce the risk of 
poverty has decreased in 2016. The tax and 
benefit system has helped keeping income 
inequality at moderate levels, despite recent 
increases in those levels. 
. Despite very high rates of tertiary education 
attainment, efficiency in providing basic 
skills is below the EU average. The impact of 
the students’ socioeconomic background on 
their performance is one of the strongest in the 
EU, pointing to high educational inequality. 
New policy initiatives have been introduced to 
close the achievement gap between pupils from 
different backgrounds. Their effectiveness 
remains to be seen. Adapting vocational 
education and training to labour market needs 
remains challenging. 
. Some indicators suggest that Luxembourg's 
tax rules may be used in aggressive tax 
planning structures. Luxembourg has taken 
steps to amend certain aspects of its tax system 
that may facilitate aggressive tax planning and 
is engaged in international tax reform. 
However, the absence of withholding taxes on 
royalties and interest payments made by 
companies based in Luxembourg, or the lack of 
some anti-abuse rules, suggest that the 
country’s tax rules may still be used in tax 
avoidance structures. 



