EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 



In the context of robust economic growth, 
Malta’s key challenges mostly concern its 
longer term sustainability. Growth prospects 
look favourable and the fiscal outlook remains 
positive, on the back of a significant current 
account surplus. Yet, the mounting pressure on 
infrastructure and natural resources, rising housing 
prices, as well as shortages of labour and skills 
may create challenges in the future. Reducing the 
infrastructure gap, improving labour supply, 
strengthening the business environment and 
promoting environmental sustainability remain key 
policy priorities to sustain long-term growth. 
Enhanced supervision in the financial sector is an 
additional important factor to safeguard financial 
stability and preserve Malta’s attractiveness and 
good reputation as investment destination (1). 

(1) This report assesses Malta’s economy in light of the 
European Commission’s Annual Growth Survey published 
on 22 November 2017. In the survey, the Commission calls 
on EU Member States to implement reforms to make the 
European economy more productive, resilient and 
inclusive. In so doing, Member States should focus their 
efforts on the three elements of the virtuous triangle of 
economic policy — boosting investment, pursuing 
structural reforms and ensuring responsible fiscal policies. 

Growth has remained dynamic. Real GDP 
growth was among the highest in the EU in recent 
years. It reached its peak in 2014-15, averaging 
7.7%, driven also by a surge in investment related 
to one-off factors. Despite strong net service 
exports and robust private consumption, real GDP 
growth moderated in 2016 and is forecast to have 
remained robust at 6.9 % in 2017. Moreover, 
employment growth is among the highest in the 
EU, in particular due to the services sector. The 
unemployment rate has dropped to a record low of 
under 5 %. Immigration flows were key in 
offsetting emerging skills gaps and labour 
shortages. 

Going forward, growth momentum remains 
strong. Real GDP growth is forecast to remain 
solid, reaching 4.9 % in 2018. Private consumption 
is expected to become the main driver of growth 
on the back of an increasing population and 
growing disposable income. In addition, improved 
consumer confidence and consumption is expected 
to result in a somewhat lower household saving 
rate. Investment is forecast to recover, led by the 
residential construction sector, which is expected 
to continue growing strongly in 2018. Exports are 

forecast to continue rising, in line with growing 
demand among Malta’s main trading partners. 

The current account continues to show a 
marked surplus. Since 2014, the current account 
surplus averaged close to 8 %. In mid-2017, it 
reached a peak of 10 % of GDP. This high level is 
mostly attributable to the service sector, reflecting 
buoyant activity in the gaming, tourism and 
transport sectors. The autumn forecast projects the 
surplus to stabilise below 10 %, reflecting rising 
exports. 

Strong economic growth boosted tax revenues, 
in particular direct taxes. In the context of a 
fiscal surplus, expenditure remains quite dynamic, 
calling for a close monitoring. Gross government 
debt has dropped below 60 % of GDP already in 
2016 and it is projected to continue falling. Despite 
some progress, challenges concerning tax 
compliance remain and the corporate debt bias 
remains high. 

Malta made some progress in addressing the 
2017 country-specific recommendations 
Initiatives are envisaged to expand the scope of the 
spending review and ultimately contribute to 
increasing effectiveness in public expenditure. 
While cross-border supervision remains essential 
in particular in the insurance sector, some progress 
has been made in securing more resources in the 
supervisory departments. 

Regarding the progress in reaching the national 
targets under the Europe 2020 strategy Malta has 
made progress towards its target on employment. 
However, gaps remain with respect to the targets 
for reducing greenhouse gases, raising R&D 
expenditure, increasing renewable energy 
provision, improving energy efficiency, reducing 
early school leaving, increasing the tertiary 
education attainment, and reducing poverty. 

Malta performs relatively well on the indicators 
of the Social Scoreboard supporting the 
European Pillar of Social Rights. Malta 
continues relevant policy action to address labour 
market integration and social exclusion, notably 
through its ‘make work pay’ policies. However, 
high early school leaving rates, the high gender 
employment gap and labour market participation 
of people with disabilities merit attention. 


Key structural issues analysed in this report, which 
point to particular challenges for Malta’s economy, 
are the following: 

. Short and medium-term fiscal risks appear 
contained. Public finances have benefited from 
the strengthening of tax revenues, supported by 
favourable macroeconomic conditions. The 
proceeds related to the Individual Investment 
Programme have also contributed to this 
improvement. The spending review is expected 
to be conducive to more efficient expenditure 
performance. In the long-term, age-related 
public spending in the healthcare and pension 
systems is expected to increase relatively fast 
compared to other EU countries, indicating a 
possible challenge to fiscal sustainability. 
. Some indicators suggest that Malta’s tax 
rules are used by multinationals engaged in 
aggressive tax planning structures. Malta has 
taken steps to amend certain aspects of its tax 
system that may facilitate aggressive tax 
planning. However, the existence of some tax 
rules (among them the design of the planned 
Notional Interest Deduction regime), the 
absence of withholding taxes on payments 
made by companies based in Malta, combined 
with a lack of some anti-abuse rules, suggest 
that Malta's tax rules may still be used in tax 
avoidance structures. 
. Ensuring effective financial supervision 
remains a challenge. The financial sector is 
characterised by a large number of foreign 
institutions, in particular insurance companies, 
predominantly operating cross-border. The 
effectiveness of the recently adopted anti-
money laundering legislation has to be 
thoroughly followed. In this context, ensuring a 
strengthened supervisory framework is crucial 
to preserve Malta’s good reputation and 
attractiveness as an international financial 
centre. 
. House prices have surged and deserve 
continuous monitoring. Strong economic 
activity, favourable labour market conditions, 
investment in real estate by non-residents and 
low interest rates have all contributed to a 
sustained increase in house prices in the recent 
past. Residential construction and mortgage 
lending are experiencing rapid growth, which 
may lead to increased vulnerability of the 
economy to housing market developments, also 
considering that the bulk of new mortgages are 
at variable interest rates. 
. Malta’s labour market continues to perform 
strongly, however with a still high gender 
gap. Employment grows, in line with the high 
economic growth. The employment rate 
reached 71.8 % in Q3 2017. Wage growth 
remains modest, despite the continued fall in 
unemployment. A large gender employment 
gap persists, as employment rates are high for 
women below 30, but they considerably lower 
above this age. 
. Skills shortages have become very 
pronounced. Over 30 % of companies report 
skills shortages, a significantly higher share 
than previous years. These shortages are being 
filled with foreign labour across all skills 
levels. While investment in education and skills 
continues, the rate of early school leaving 
remains very high and has not improved much 
compared to the previous year. Educational 
outcomes remain strongly linked to socio-
economic background. Basic skills attainment 
among young people is still weak. 
. Poverty and social exclusion risks have been 
reduced but remain substantial for some 
population groups. Poverty and social 
exclusion risks declined to levels last seen in 
2008. However, single-earner households and 
the low-skilled face substantial poverty risks. 
There are obstacles to integration of the foreign 
population, especially non EU migrants who 
face a high risk of poverty and social exclusion 
despite a high employment rate. Malta 
continues to strengthen its policies for active 
inclusion, and has recently adopted a Strategy 
on the integration of migrants. Income 
inequalities remain below the EU average 
thanks to low market inequalities and the 
features of Malta’s tax and benefits system. 
. The SMEs sector has shown a considerable 
dynamism in recent years, despite existing 
gaps in the R&D framework. Growth in 
terms of number of persons employed and 
value added has been above EU average and 



only a minority of firms appears to be finance 
constrained. At the same time, the 
predominance of micro and small firms, which 
have to rely on internal funding to support 
R&D activities, and the size of local market 
limit their innovation potential. While Malta’s 
R&D performance has recently improved, a 
better innovation ecosystem would enhance the 
capacity of innovative companies to scale up 
their activities. 
. Shortcomings in the judicial and anti-
corruption framework affect the business 
climate. The justice system continues to face 
challenges concerning its efficiency. According 
to a recent Eurobarometer Flash Survey, 
corruption is perceived as a problematic factor 
for doing business in Malta. The fragmented 
landscape of anti-corruption institutions and the 
lack of formalised institutional coordination 
may hamper effective investigation and 
prosecution of corruption allegations. 
. The road transport sector faces major 
infrastructure and sustainability challenges. 
Severe traffic congestion constitutes a barrier 
to investment, and generates significant 
external costs and greenhouse gas emissions 
(also given the expected increasing demand for 
transport). The authorities have recently 
announced a project to upgrade the road 
infrastructure over a period of seven years, 
which is however expected to reduce 
congestion costs and greenhouse gas emissions 
only modestly. 
. Increased economic activity may exacerbate 
existing bottlenecks, including in 
infrastructure, and put further pressure on 
environmental resources. Moving towards a 
more circular economy and tackling the 
negative externalities from the construction 
sector and the property market, for example 
concerning waste disposal, environmental 
impacts and energy performance, remain 
challenging. If not addressed, bottlenecks in 
natural resources and infrastructure may also 
affect the development of the tourism sector, 
still a key pillar of the Maltese economy. 
Tourism expansion may itself intensify 
pressure on the country’s resources. 



