EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  In 2014, the economy and the labour market  to continue working beyond the statutory  continued to perform well and the outlook for  pensionable age. Shortcomings in the  2015-16 is favourable. Strong labour market  education system contribute to the low skills  fundamentals, with unemployment dropping below  levels in the population.  6 %, recovering investment and an accommodative  fiscal stance are projected to have resulted in real  •  To improve the energy security of supply  GDP growth of 3.3 % in 2014. Despite the  and environmental performance, the  challenging external environment and the high  authorities have focused efforts on  import-intensiveness of domestic demand, Malta’s  reforming the energy sector to diversify the  exports continued to outpace imports and the net  energy mix. These measures are expected to  external position is expected to have improved  bring an end to oil dependency of the  over the past year. Economic and employment  electricity sector by 2016, although import  growth are projected to continue to outpace the  dependency will remain high (for gas and  euro area average in 2015-16.  electricity). The electricity generation system  is also expected to become less carbon- This Country Report assesses Malta’s economy  intensive. As regards transport, although the  against the background of the Commission’s  public bus transport system has been  Annual Growth Survey which recommends three  privatised in an effort to promote a shift from  main pillars for the EU’s economic and social  individual to collective transport, the external  policy in 2015: investment, structural reforms and  costs caused by road traffic remain a  fiscal responsibility. In line with the Investment  challenge.  Plan for Europe, it also explores ways to maximise  the impact of public resources and unlock private  •  Despite improvements, Malta’s  investment. The main observations and findings of  competitiveness continues to be hampered  the analysis are as follows:  by structural challenges in the business  environment and the innovation  • Despite a lower budget deficit, the  framework. The length of public procurement  sustainability of public finances remains a  procedures has been reduced considerably but  challenge. While Malta does not appear to  still remains somewhat above the average for  face sustainability risks in the short term,  the EU. Malta’s knowledge-driven growth  these risks increase in the medium and long  potential as a very small open economy has  term due to the budgetary impact of  not yet been fully exploited and the reform of  population ageing. The high level of  the judiciary has yet to adequately tackle  contingent liabilities presents an additional  inefficiencies in the system.   challenge. Insufficient tax compliance and  instances of tax evasion are long-term  •  Investment has been muted, despite the  challenges that distort the tax system and  favourable economic performance. Limited  hinder revenue collection.   capital accumulation to some extent reflected  the changing structure of the Maltese  • Over the past years, labour market  economy towards less capital-intensive  participation of women and, to a lesser  service activities. However, the analysis also  extent, older workers has improved but  pointed to a number of structural weaknesses  remains still considerably below EU  that hinder private investment, such as  average. Care obligations, benefit design and  difficulties in the access to finance and  insufficient flexible-work arrangements are  inefficiencies in the business environment also  key obstacles. Malta is currently designing  related to shortcomings in the energy and  and implementing a number of measures to  transport sectors. Investment is projected to  increase the participation of women in the  rebound in the medium-term, although it is  labour market. Policy efforts have also been  unlikely to reach its pre-crisis levels.  dedicated to increasing the employment rate  of older workers, focusing on increasing the Overall, Malta has made some progress on effective retirement age and enabling workers addressing the Country-Specific Executive summary Recommendations issued by the Council in  procurement proceedings, and an inefficient  2014. Some progress was made on improving the  judiciary continue to represent challenges to  participation of women in the labour market and  Malta’s attractiveness for foreign investors. A  improving the quality of public finances. Progress  modest framework for research and innovation  was made on the fiscal framework reform, with the  and difficult access to finance, particularly  adoption of the Fiscal Responsibility Act and the  non-debt financing, add to the scope of the  appointment of the members of the Fiscal Council,  challenge.  but the concrete impact of the new set-up will take  time to materialise. Some progress was also made  •  Labour market participation still  on reducing reliance on imported oil, improving  represents a sizeable untapped potential for  the links between the education system and the  the domestic economy. Labour market  labour market, improving alternatives to debt  activity remains particularly low among  financing for companies and improving the  women and older workers, reflecting not yet  sustainability of the healthcare system. However,  sufficient policy action in the areas of elderly  measures to reform the pension system to ensure  care, reconciliation of work and family life  its long-term sustainability are still lacking.  and education and training, which are seen as  key inhibiting factors.  This Country Report reveals the policy challenges  stemming from the analysis, namely:  • Challenges remain with regard to the  quality and the sustainability of public  finances. The tangible impacts of ongoing  measures to improve tax compliance and fight  tax evasion are not yet clear and their pace of  is slow, notably on the merger of tax  departments. Plans to examine possibilities to  promote electronic payment systems are  encouraging, but are still at an exploratory  stage. Finally, long-term debt sustainability  remains a challenge in view of the progress  registered so far on the reform of the pension  system and implementation of the healthcare  reform .  • Resource efficiency in the economy is  hampered by weaknesses in the energy and  transport systems. The reform of energy  system is in the process of implementation and  the tangible benefits it could bring have yet to  materialise. In the absence of more focused  efforts on boosting domestic production of  renewable energy and raising energy  efficiency, however, Malta’s energy import  dependency will continue. Tackling road  transport congestion also continues to be a  challenge.  • Despite some policy measures in this area,  structural features continue to hinder the  friendliness of the business environment. A  burdensome administration, slow public  