EXECUTIVE SUMMARY The Netherlands is experiencing a gradual economic recovery mainly driven by domestic demand. Following the contraction in real GDP in 2012 and 2013, the Dutch economy returned to positive economic growth in 2014. Economic growth is expected to accelerate to 1.4 percent in 2015 and 1.7 percent in 2016. The economic recovery is increasingly being driven by domestic demand, based on real wage growth and better labour market conditions. Consumer confidence and households' investment are also supported by the nascent recovery in the housing market. The Dutch labour market showed a moderate revival in 2014, which is expected to continue in the coming years. Inflation is expected to remain muted, supporting real wage growth in the short term but limiting deleveraging. Government finances are expected to improve in 2015 and 2016.  This Country Report assesses the Netherlands' economy against the background of the Commission's Annual Growth Survey which recommends three main pillars for the EU's economic and social policy in 2015: investment, structural reforms, and fiscal responsibility. In line with the Investment Plan for Europe, it also explores ways to maximise the impact of public resources and unlock private investment. Finally, it assesses the Netherlands in the light of the findings of the 2015 Alert Mechanism Report, in which the Commission found it useful to further examine the persistence of imbalances or their unwinding. The main findings of the In-Depth Review contained in this Country Report are: The Netherlands’ current account has been constantly in surplus for over three decades. The current account surplus is traceable to fundamental features of the Dutch economy, such as energy exports, goods re-exports and the international capital flows of multinationals. The surplus also reflects the ongoing and necessary deleveraging of households and the (still weak) cyclical position of the economy. Overall, underlying mismatches between savings and investment appear to be smaller than the headline figures suggest. Investment activity in the Netherlands declined as a percentage of GDP since the turn of century, partly as a consequence of lower prices of investment goods (in particular of information and communication technology equipment) and, in particular since 2008,  as a consequence of lower investment in construction and real estate. Public investment and private investment in productive equipment were relatively stable. For strengthening the economic growth of the Netherlands in the medium run, the declining public R&D-intensity and better use of the excellent knowledge base of the country warrant attention. The pension and tax systems give households strong obligations and incentives to invest in housing and save in pension schemes, leading to potentially inefficient allocation of capital. People have the incentive to buy a dwelling early in their life by incurring high levels of mortgage debt. The obligation to save high amounts in the pension system early in the life cycle also reduces the financial room for manoeuvre of young people. Pension funds are somewhat risk-averse, which could lead to a suboptimal allocation of their investments.  The statutory retirement age has been increased (and linked to life expectancy) but the distribution of costs and risks has not changed in the (funded) occupational pillar. This has an impact on the accumulation of savings and the allocation of capital in the pension system, possibly reducing the long-term growth prospects of the Dutch economy. Driven by tax incentives, high household debt levels have built up over decades and are expected to decline slowly in the coming decades. Long-standing tax incentives and financial innovations have encouraged households to become highly indebted by taking up mortgages. Newly introduced policy and supervisory measures are curbing mortgage growth. Risks from the high level of household debt to the financial sector are contained by, for example, the high net asset position of households, prudent loan-to-income ratios and the recovering housing market.  The functioning of the housing market is still distorted by the substantial mortgage interest deductibility and a rental market that is not functioning properly. Mortgage interest deductibility is partially and very gradually being phased out but a substantial part of the subsidy will remain. Mortgage interest deductibility still gives households the incentive to invest in relatively unproductive assets. The emergence of a properly functioning rental market is constrained by a social Executive summary housing segment still facing allocation inefficiencies. The Country Report also analyses macroeconomic issues and the main findings are: The labour market is holding up well and poverty remains low. The Dutch labour market is in relatively good shape and unemployment is decreasing. Some groups of people at the margin of the labour market face difficulties to enter the labour market. Poverty has only increased marginally since 2008 and remains low. Some forms of growth-friendly expenditure are under pressure. Whereas the education system delivers good results and public expenditure for education remains high, public support for research and innovation is set to decline over the coming years. Overall, the Netherlands has made some progress in addressing the country-specific recommendations issued by the Council in 2014. The Netherlands has made some progress in protecting expenditure directly relevant to growth but has only made limited progress in further reforming the housing market. In particular, the partial phasing-out of the mortgage interest deductibility has not been stepped up despite the opportunity created by a recovery in the housing market and an improving economic environment. Some or even substantial progress has been made regarding the recommendations concerning the pension system, long-term care and the labour market. The Country Report reveals the policy challenges stemming from the analysis of macro-economic imbalances: The Netherlands has to find the right balance between the necessary deleveraging, in particular of households, and giving sufficient support to domestic demand to sustain the economy recovery. As long as households increase their savings to deleverage, the current account surplus will remain high and above the level justified by fundamentals.  Raising the growth potential will depend on attracting sufficient labour and facilitating the most efficient allocation of capital. Greater labour utilisation is needed to soften the effects of demographic changes. Reforms have been implemented to make work financially more attractive but disincentives to work from taxes and social security contributions remain high. The role of pension-regulation and the tax system in the allocation of capital will be increasingly important in fostering economic growth. With an ageing society, the Netherlands faces the challenge of maintaining its level of welfare in the future. With an ageing population economy growth depends ever more on improvements in the efficiency and the resilience of the economy. In particular, a regulatory framework that supports growth and investing in research, innovation and education plays a key role.  