EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 



The Netherlandsí economic expansion remains 
strong and offers a window of opportunity to 
boost the reform momentum. In its coalition 
agreement 2018-2021, the new government 
announced a number of measures in the field of 
fiscal policy, housing market, labour market and 
pensions. Ensuring that these measures are swiftly 
implemented would improve domestic demand and 
support potential growth. While measures have 
been announced to reduce the debt bias for 
households, incentives to incur debt remain. The 
labour market continued its recovery in 2017 and 
performed well across the board, although the 
challenges in the field of pensions and labour 
market segmentation remain.(1) 

(1) This report assesses the economy of the Netherlands in the 
light of the European Commissionís Annual Growth 
Survey published on 22 November 2017. In the survey, the 
Commission calls on EU Member States to implement 
reforms to make the European economy more productive, 
resilient and inclusive. In so doing, Member States should 
focus their efforts on the three elements of the virtuous 
triangle of economic policy ñ boosting investment, 
pursuing structural reforms and ensuring responsible fiscal 
policies. At the same time, the Commission published the 
Alert Mechanism Report (AMR) that initiated the seventh 
round of the macroeconomic imbalance procedure. The 
AMR found that the Netherlands warranted an in depth 
review which is presented in this report. 

Economic growth accelerated to 3.1 % in 2017, 
the fastest in a decade. The solid economic 
performance in 2017 was broad based, with both 
domestic demand and net exports making a 
positive contribution to growth. The European 
Commissionís Interim Winter 2018 forecast 
projects economic growth of 2.9 % for 2018 and 
2.5 % for 2019, with the domestic economyís 
strong performance expected to continue. The 
growth contribution from net exports is expected 
to be fairly limited given strong domestic demand, 
which drives up imports. 

The investment rate has returned to its long-
term average. Residential investment volumes in 
particular have been highly cyclical, dropping 
sharply after the crisis and experiencing double-
digit growth in recent years. Corporate investment 
in equipment grew in line with GDP and is 
expected to accelerate on the back of rising 
capacity utilisation rates. Public and private 
investment in R&D increased to 2.0 % in 2016, 
falling short of the Europe 2020 target of 2.5 % of 
GDP. While barriers to private investment appear 
to be minor, procedures for obtaining building 

permits are lengthy compared to other Member 
States. 

A buoyant housing market boosts household 
assets, but may also lead to further imbalances. 
Driven by low interest rates, house prices and 
transaction volumes have increased sharply in 
recent years. Rising house prices have positive 
wealth effects and gradually lift affected 
households out of negative housing equity. At 
national level, house price valuation indicators do 
not point to overvaluation. However, there are 
signs that house price increases in some regions 
cannot be explained by fundamental factors alone. 
Nominal debt levels have started to rise again, 
albeit much slower than house price growth, which 
limits financial vulnerabilities. 

Wage growth remained moderate despite a 
tightening labour market. In 2016, wage growth 
outpaced productivity gains, resulting in a small 
increase in the nominal unit labour cost. However, 
taken over a longer period wage growth has been 
below the level that could be expected based on 
fundamental drivers such as unemployment, 
productivity and inflation. In the next years, wage 
growth is expected to increase in line with further 
labour market tightening. 

The new government announced a large 
discretionary fiscal stimulus package for 2018-
2021. The budget surplus is expected to have 
increased to 0.7 % in 2017, while the general 
government debt-to-GDP ratio fell below the 60 % 
threshold. The government announced increased 
spending on social affairs (in particular child-
related benefits), defence, education and 
innovation. The budgetary framework has been 
amended to exclude a number of cyclical 
expenditures from its fixed budgetary ceilings. 
This improves its stabilisation function on the 
expenditure side, while increasing the cyclicality 
of the budget. Fiscal sustainability has improved 
thanks to headline budget surpluses, higher GDP 
growth and a favourable public debt trajectory. 
This has led to the Netherlands being designated as 
ëlow riskí based on the Commissionís baseline 
medium-term projections. 

Some indicators suggest that the Netherlands' 
tax rules are used by multinationals engaged in 
aggressive tax planning structures. The 
Netherlands has taken steps to amend certain 


aspects of its tax system that may facilitate 
aggressive tax planning, and the government has 
announced a reform agenda to further amend 
certain aspects of the tax system. For the time 
being, the absence of withholding taxes on 
dividend payments by co-operatives, the 
possibility for hybrid mismatches using the limited 
partnership (CV) and the absence of withholding 
taxes on royalties and interest payments, combined 
with the lack of some anti-abuse rules, may 
facilitate aggressive tax planning. 

The Netherlands has made some progress in 
addressing the 2017 country-specific 
recommendations (CSRs). Substantial progress 
has been made in supporting potential growth and 
domestic demand; some progress has been made in 
R&D investment. The government announced that 
it will speed up the cut in tax relief on mortgage 
interest payments, and included it in the coalition 
agreement. However, only some steps were taken 
to reduce remaining distortions in the housing 
market, leading to some progress overall on 
CSR 1. The Netherlands has made limited progress 
in tackling remaining barriers to hiring staff on 
permanent contracts. No concrete measures have 
been taken yet to reduce distortive tax incentives 
that favour self-employment or to increase the 
social protection coverage for the self-employed. 
The government reaffirmed its intention to reform 
the second pension pillar, although no new 
measures have been taken since the CSRs were 
adopted.. Limited progress has been made in 
creating conditions to promote higher real wage 
growth while respecting the role of social partners, 
leading to limited progress overall on CSR 2. 

On progress in reaching the national targets under 
the Europe 2020 Strategy (see also Annex A), the 
Netherlands is doing well on employment, 
greenhouse gas emissions, energy efficiency, early 
school leaving and tertiary education attainment. 
However, more effort is needed on R&D 
investment, renewable energy and poverty 
reduction. 

The Netherlands performs relatively well on the 
indicators of the Social Scoreboard supporting 
the European Pillar of Social Rights. The labour 
market performance and social outcomes are good 
and inequality is low. Few young people are not in 
employment, education or training. The share of 
people at risk of poverty or social exclusion is low. 
However, certain issues merit attention such as low 
but slightly increasing income inequality and good 
but weakening impact of social transfers in 
reducing poverty. 

The main findings of the in-depth review 
contained in this report, and the related policy 
challenges, are as follows: 

. Housing market institutions have 
contributed to high household debt levels, 
and inefficiencies remain. Owner-occupancy 
rates are high and have been strengthened by 
the generous tax relief on mortgage interest 
payments. Before the crisis, interest-only 
mortgages and very high loan-to-value ratios 
drove up household indebtedness to around 
120 % of GDP in 2009. Although it is falling 
gradually, the household debt-to-GDP ratio is 
still twice the euro area average. While 
mortgage tax relief is being cut gradually, the 
effective subsidy to debt-financed 
homeownership remains substantial. 
. The financial attractiveness of owner-
occupancy and social housing partly 
accounts for the underdeveloped private 
rental market. The social housing and rent-
controlled sector is large compared to other 
Member States. The private rental market is the 
only non-subsidised housing sector and 
remains underdeveloped. The lack of a well-
functioning middle segment on the rental 
market encourages households to buy rather 
than rent, leading to high debt-to-income ratios 
and financial vulnerability at a young age. 
. The current account continues to show a 
marked surplus. The Netherlands has had a 
current account surplus of 6 % of GDP on 
average for the last 30 years. This high level is 
mostly accounted for by the non-financial 
corporate (NFC) sector. A comparatively large 
corporate savings surplus is rooted in a 
relatively high operating surplus, together with 
high foreign investment income and low levels 
of profit distribution by multinationals. After 
the crisis, household debt reduction together 
with fiscal consolidation saw the current 
account surplus peak at 10.3 % of GDP in 
2012, after which it declined to 9 % in 2016. 
The European Commissionís Autumn 2017 



forecast projects a gradual decline in the 
current account balance following buoyant 
domestic demand. Simulations in this report 
show that an increase in public investment 
would reduce the trade surplus and would also 
be passed on to the euro area through potential 
spillover effects, leading to higher economic 
growth of the other euro area countries. 
. The second pillar pension system plays a key 
role in shaping household finances, 
especially in combination with high 
mortgage debt. While the pension system 
performs well on pension adequacy and fiscal 
sustainability, it holds drawbacks in terms of 
intergenerational fairness, transparency and 
flexibility. Moreover, second pillar pension 
contributions are high and fluctuate depending 
on the financial performance of pension funds. 
As such, it may affect household spending in a 
pro-cyclical way, with risks seemingly to 
weigh on young age groups as lower indexation 
and higher pension contributions have been the 
primary means of adjustment. Importantly, 
households combine substantial housing and 
pension wealth with high mortgage debt. 
However, the former are highly illiquid and 
unevenly distributed across generations. This 
makes households vulnerable to economic 
shocks and accentuates the pro-cyclical 
dynamics of household finances. 


Other key structural issues analysed in this report 
which point to particular challenges facing the 
Dutch economy, are as follows: 

. Despite a reduction in the tax burden, non-
tax compulsory payments are expected to 
remain high. The Dutch government 
announced a tax reform for 2019 that will 
reduce the number of tax brackets from four to 
two and lower the top tax rate from 52 % to 
49 %. The overall income tax burden is 
expected to decline. However, non-tax 
compulsory payments such as pension 
contributions and healthcare premiums drive up 
the total compulsory payment wedge on labour. 
While this may be equitable, it could also give 
rise to other inefficiencies, especially in terms 
of the above-mentioned link between 
compulsory pension contributions and 
household finances. 
. The labour market continued its recovery in 
2017 and performed well in terms of job 
creation, although the challenges of labour 
market segmentation and integration of 
people with a migrant background remain. 
Total employment rose steadily, while the 
unemployment rate continued to fall in 2017. 
Flexible employment constitutes a relatively 
large and increasing share of the labour market. 
The self-employed are not obliged to be 
insured against labour-related risks such as 
accidents at work, unemployment and old age 
(second pillar); which could affect the 
sustainability of the social security system in 
the long run. The new government announced 
several measures potentially addressing 
segmentation, but the specifics, timeframe and 
possible impact remain unclear. Finally, there 
is still untapped labour potential in the high 
number of women working part-time and also 
people born outside the EU given that their 
employment rate lags behind that of those born 
in the Netherlands. 
. School education outcomes are above the EU 
average, but have worsened since 2012. In 
the 2015 Programme for International Student 
Assessment (PISA), the proportion of low 
achievers increased in all three core fields. 
Differences between schools have one of the 
biggest impact on pupilsí performance, and are 
strongly linked to the different educational 
tracks they offer. 
. According to worldwide rankings, the 
Netherlands has an efficient and productive 
R&D sector, but growth-friendly public 
expenditure is lower than that of top 
performers. The countryís high-performing 
education system and scientific base provide a 
sound basis for boosting innovation and growth 
capacity through education and R&D activities. 
Although substantial additional investment has 
been announced, public R&D intensity is set to 
decline. 
. The reduction of CO2 emissions is on track, 
but the share of renewable energy 
production is low. The Netherlands is 
expected to miss its national target of 14 % 
renewable energy production by 2020, with the 



