EXECUTIVE SUMMARY Poland weathered the economic crisis and its aftermath very well. Real GDP has increased cumulatively by 19% since 2008, which is unparalleled in the EU. In 2014, economic activity recovered from a temporary slowdown in the two previous years, as domestic demand picked up again, replacing external trade as the main growth driver. Private consumption is expected to remain strong in the near term, supported by solid employment and real wage growth. The ongoing recovery of credit growth, coupled with declining financing costs and increasing profit margins, is expected to provide additional support for private investment, which however, remains to be hindered by deficiencies in business environment. Public investment is also projected to gather steam in 2015 with the rollout of new EU-financed projects. In 2014, the unemployment rate fell substantially, while the employment rate improved on the back of strong employment growth and weak demographics. Like in the rest of Europe, inflationary pressures subsided. In 2014 inflation receded and is set to pick up modestly in 2015. This Country Report assesses Poland's economy against the background of the Commission's Annual Growth Survey which recommends three main pillars for the EU's economic and social policy in 2015: investment, structural reforms, and fiscal responsibility. In line with the Investment Plan for Europe, it also explores ways to maximise the impact of public resources and unlock private investment. The main findings of the Country Report are: • Public finances have been gradually improving but structural challenges remain, especially in relation to the efficiency of public spending and tax compliance. The general government deficit is expected to fall gradually, from 3.6% of GDP in 2014 to narrowly below 3% of GDP in 2015. Growing health-care expenditures pose fiscal challenges for the future. Low tax compliance remains an issue, in particular as regards the efficiency of the Polish tax administration and the administrative burden on taxpayers. The extensive use of reduced rates of the Value Added Tax (VAT) weighs on government revenues and leads to high tax compliance costs for firms; it is also a distortive and imperfect instrument to achieve redistributive objectives. The Polish fiscal framework includes positive elements but lacks a genuine independent fiscal council. • Although employment has risen consistently since 2007, the Polish labour market suffers from several structural weaknesses. Besides the long-term demographic challenge, the Polish labour market underperforms in terms of labour market participation of certain groups, labour market segmentation and geographic and vocational mobility. The latter is especially hampered by the special pension scheme for miners as well as heavily subsidised social security system and preferential tax system for farmers. In addition, the education system underperforms in matching skill supply and demand as well as in enhancing the skills serving the employability of older workers, in particular older women. Access to quality apprenticeships and work-based learning remains insufficient. Finally the share of population living at risk of poverty/social exclusion is still above the EU average, but has dropped considerably in recent years. • Poland’s good economic performance in the past 25 years relied strongly on competitive labour costs, and the country still faces the challenge of boosting its innovative capacity, to move up the value-added chain. Currently, the Polish Research and Development (R&D) and innovation system scores low on many important dimensions such as the share of companies engaging in in-house innovation, scientific excellence, intensity of cooperation between business and the research sector and the number of patents. Although individual measures to create an innovation-friendly business environment were adopted, it will remain a long.lasting challenge to measurably improve the country’s performance.  scientific  and  technological  • Despite bottlenecks  and  sizeable deficiencies  in  investment, transport,  energy and information and communications networks continue to weigh on Poland’s growth potential. The railway sector suffers from low investment, and broadband internet coverage is underdeveloped. The Polish economy is energy and carbon intensive and potential gains from improving energy efficiency are significant. The country also has an aging energy generation Executive summary infrastructure, which is heavily dependent on coal. The energy network is not sufficiently connected to neighbouring countries • The business environment remains burdensome and complex in a number of areas, such as paying taxes or dealing with construction permits. The vast nationwide network of business environment institutions remains fragmented, ineffective and overly-reliant on public support. The digitalisation of public administration is slow and fragmented. On the other hand, the deregulation of professional services has progressed well and will facilitate the ease of doing business and bring productivity gains in the economy. Overall, Poland has made some progress in addressing the CSRs issued by the Council in 2014. Firstly, the general government deficit declined and remained within the headline ceilings recommended by the Council. No progress was made towards completing the fiscal framework. Some progress was made towards increasing the effectiveness of the tax administration and facilitating tax compliance. However, no progress was made in addressing the issue of the extensive system of reduced value-added tax rates. On labour market policies, progress was mixed. Some effort was made to reduce youth unemployment and to increase female participation, but only limited progress was made with improving the employability of older workers. Limited progress was also made in reducing labour market segmentation, and no measures were taken to reform the special pension and social benefit schemes for farmers and miners. After presenting a promising strategic programme to improve the innovative capacity of firms last year, Poland made some progress in better targeting existing instruments, only limited progress in strengthening the links between research, innovation and business, and no progress in improving the effectiveness of R&D tax incentives. There was some progress in improving the energy generation capacity, energy efficiency and broadband coverage, while limited progress was made in improving the railway infrastructure. There was continued and substantial progress in implementing an ambitious reform facilitating access to regulated professions, and some progress was made in improving the business environment, while progress was limited in relation to construction permits. The Country Report also discusses the policy challenges stemming from the analysis, including the following: • In the area of public finances, the inefficiency of the country’s tax administration and high costs of tax compliance for taxpayers weigh on tax collection and the business environment. • The amendment to the act on employment promotion and labour market institutions adopted in 2014 is an important step towards increasing labour market participation. Ensuring appropriate coordination, monitoring and evaluation would be crucial, especially for boosting the employment of older and younger people. •The high incidence of civil-law labour contracts and the high tax wedge on low-skilled labour contribute to labour market segmentation. • As regards the innovative capacity of the economy, improving the quality and effectiveness of R&D policy and strengthening business innovation are major challenges for Poland. Effective R&D tax incentives are crucial for supporting private R&D. • Insufficient coordination across levels of government and inadequate capacity of regional and local governments to implement and monitor policies is an obstacle for good governance and effectiveness of public administration. •Investment in sustainable and environmental.friendly transport remains low. A lack of competition in energy markets leads to insufficient supply diversification. 