EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 



Poland’s social, fiscal and economic situation 
offers a good opportunity to address medium-
term challenges. Economic growth is strong, the 
financial sector is stable and there are no short-
term risks to fiscal sustainability. Poland could 
safeguard medium-term growth prospects by 
addressing the challenges connected to shrinking 
working-age population and ageing. Boosting 
private investment and innovation would help 
sustain the successful convergence towards 
average EU income levels, which has been 
observed in recent years. While some policies, 
such as lowering the retirement age, have not been 
conducive to growth, other measures have been 
undertaken to improve the country’s economic and 
social prospects and to improve tax collection (1). 

(1) This report assesses Poland’s economy in light of the 
European Commission’s Annual Growth Survey published 
on 22 November 2017. In the survey, the Commission calls 
on EU Member States to implement structural reforms to 
make the European economy more productive, resilient and 
inclusive. In so doing, Member States should focus their 
efforts on the three elements of the virtuous triangle of 
economic policy – boosting investment, pursuing structural 
reforms and ensuring responsible fiscal policies. 

The economy has been growing robustly. 
Domestic demand, especially private consumption, 
has been the dominant driver of growth over the 
last few years. This was particularly evident in 
2016 and 2017. However, investment remained 
sluggish until mid-2017. Strong private 
consumption has been supported by a buoyant 
labour market, increased fiscal transfers and 
record-high levels of consumer confidence. 

The short-term economic outlook remains 
favourable. After increasing by 4.6 % in 2017, 
real GDP is forecast to grow by 4.2 % in 2018 and 
3.6 % in 2019, among the highest rates in the EU. 
An increasing utilisation of EU funds should result 
in higher investment, in particular public 
investment. Private consumption, driven by rapidly 
rising wages, is projected to remain robust, albeit 
slowing from the exceptionally high rate in 2017. 
Solid domestic demand is forecast to enable higher 
imports, but favourable developments in foreign 
demand and the improving competitiveness of the 
Polish economy should support a steady rise in 
exports. Inflation is set to increase, driven mainly 
by strong wage growth. 

Several structural factors weigh on the 
economy's long-term growth potential. As the 

sources of strong past growth gradually diminish, 
Poland faces the challenge to become more 
innovative and to better position itself in the global 
value chains. An expected decline in the working 
age population underlines the need for increasing 
labour market participation. The country’s ability 
to do so will also depend on its success in building 
up the skills of its population. A more skilled 
workforce can stimulate innovation and associated 
productivity gains, which are key drivers of 
economic growth. This is also recognised in the 
government’s responsible development strategy. 
Future private investment will largely depend on 
macroeconomic outlook and on the stability and 
quality of law and institutions, including the policy 
and regulatory environment. The rule of law, 
including the independence of the judiciary and 
legal certainty, are also of key importance. 

Overall, Poland has made limited progress (2) in 
addressing the 2017 country-specific 
recommendations (CSRs). Limited progress was 
made in addressing the recommendations on public 
finance. First steps were taken to reform the 
budgetary framework, while the extensive use of 
reduced VAT rates has not been addressed. 
Limited progress has been made on taking 
measures to get more people into the labour 
market. No effective measures were taken to 
increase the effective retirement age and to reform 
special pension arrangements. There was limited 
progress on removing obstacles to investment, 
including in the transport sector. 

(2) Information on the level of progress and actions taken to 
address the policy advice in each respective subpart of a 
CSR is presented in the Overview table in the Annex. This 
overall assessment does not include an assessment of 
compliance with the Stability and Growth Pact. 

Poland is making good progress in reaching the 
national targets under the Europe 2020 strategy in 
the following areas: greenhouse gas emissions, 
poverty, energy efficiency, tertiary education, 
reducing early school leaving and the employment 
rate. Progress is limited in R&D investment and in 
renewable energy. 

Poland performs relatively well on the 
indicators of the Social Scoreboard supporting 
the European Pillar of Social Rights. A 
significant gender employment gap is, inter alia, 
related to limited access to childcare for children 
under three and shortcomings in the provision of 


long-term care. High unmet needs in the healthcare 
system also emerge as an important challenge. 

The main findings of this report and the related 
policy challenges are as follows: 

. There is no short-term risk to fiscal 
sustainability. The headline deficit, unlike the 
structural one, is estimated to have strongly 
declined in 2017 and is projected to broadly 
stabilise in 2018-2019. This improvement is to 
a large extent driven by strong economic 
growth. In the short term, no major risks to 
fiscal sustainability are foreseen. Longer term 
risks stem primarily from high expected age-
related expenditure. 
. Measures taken to increase tax revenue are 
bearing fruit. In 2017, tax revenues increased 
significantly. This was due to the improved 
macroeconomic conditions and to a number of 
measures implemented in recent years. New 
measures are also in the pipeline. Two 
important challenges emerge in this respect: 
ensuring permanency of stronger revenues and 
preventing an increase in the cost of tax 
compliance. In 2017, Poland did not tackle the 
extensive use of reduced VAT rates. This 
results in large foregone tax revenues and 
overly complicates the tax system. 
. Overall, the fiscal framework is strong. 
Fiscal rules are effective and stable. The 
authorities plan to address deficiencies in 
budgetary planning and procedures. Poland is, 
however, the only EU Member State that has 
not yet set up an independent fiscal council. 
. The effectiveness and efficiency of increased 
social spending and future pension adequacy 
raise concerns. Higher social benefits are 
expected to further reduce poverty and 
inequality that have continued to decline for 
several years. However, some elements of the 
benefit system appear to be creating 
disincentives to work, in particular for the low-
skilled. Unless effective counteracting 
measures are taken, the significantly lowered 
statutory retirement age will depress pensions 
with consequences for inequality and poverty 
among older people. A comprehensive 
assessment of the efficiency of the social 
benefit system is currently not available. 
Safeguarding the resources to support 
important social policy areas, such as health 
and long-term care, is likely to be challenging. 
. Work to improve the management of public 
expenditure has started. Since many recent 
measures structurally increase public 
expenditure, its effective management is of 
crucial importance for both short-term and 
long-term fiscal sustainability. Poland has 
initiated work to reform the budgetary process 
with a view to increase the effectiveness and 
efficiency of spending. 
. The banking sector has remained liquid and 
well capitalised. Banks’ profitability has been 
reduced by low interest rates, the tax on 
financial sector assets and higher contributions 
to bank guarantee and relief funds. Risks 
related to loans in foreign currency are 
gradually diminishing. While a wide range of 
related legislative proposals were tabled, none 
have as yet been adopted. 
. The role of strong, independent financial 
supervision is increasingly important. This is 
especially relevant given the recently 
strengthened links between the financial sector 
and the public sector, in particular as the state 
now controls the two largest banks and the 
largest insurer. 
. Labour market situation is the best in recent 
history; yet, getting more people to work 
would ease labour shortages. Employment 
rates have continued to rise (above 70 % for 
those aged 20-64 in 2017), to the point that 
labour shortages are affecting business activity. 
Barriers to labour market participation include 
disincentives to work originating from the 
benefit system and limited access to long-term 
care and childcare. Arrangements for a better 
work-life balance, including part-time work, 
are not widely provided. These barriers are 
particularly relevant for groups with lower 
activity rates: women, low-skilled people, and 
older and disabled people. Permanent 
employment has been rising fast, but the share 
of temporary contracts remains high. High 
incidence of self-employment and other 
atypical work combined with weaker welfare 



coverage of these workers creates risks. Labour 
mobility is hampered by sector-specific 
arrangements (such as the special social 
security system for farmers), shortcomings in 
the housing market and transport infrastructure. 
After a steady rise in immigration to Poland in 
recent years, non-EU workers (especially from 
Ukraine) now play an important role in the 
Polish labour market. 
. A continued upskilling of the labour force is 
crucial to improve employability and to 
foster innovation. The currently low number 
of adults in education and training and its 
impact on skills and competences is an obstacle 
to employment. However, the Polish education 
system has two strong features: a high 
percentage of tertiary graduates and good basic 
skills at completion of lower secondary school. 
Developing independent, creative and critical 
thinking and learning is a key challenge for all 
levels of the education and training system. 
. An improved access to healthcare is key to 
better health outcomes. This is particularly 
challenging given the low level of public 
funding and the low number of doctors and 
nurses. In 2017, some efforts were made to 
distribute healthcare resources more efficiently. 
. The business environment overall is 
favourable, while investment remains 
restrained by barriers related to the quality 
of regulation and investor-uncertainty. 
Private investment has been low for many 
years, while public investment has benefitted 
from the wide-spread use of EU funds. The 
regulatory framework and other barriers to the 
expansion of firms are affecting investment 
activity and productivity. Work continues on 
some legislative proposals to improve the 
conditions for business activity. High 
uncertainty, resulting, e.g., from abrupt 
regulatory changes, appears to hinder 
investment. Inadequate financing may also be a 
constraint for some companies. Effective and 
efficient public administration, including 
procedures for public procurement, spatial 
planning, and building permits is key for the 
country’s investment climate and regional 
development. State-owned and state-controlled 
companies continue to gain importance. 
. Poland adopted reforms of the justice 
system which led the Commission to 
conclude that there is a clear risk of a 
serious breach of the rule of law. An efficient 
and independent judicial system is beneficial 
for the business environment. Since late 2015, 
the Polish authorities have adopted several 
laws affecting the structure of the justice 
system. The reforms should be carried out in a 
way which protects the independence of the 
judiciary. In this regard, the Commission has 
concluded that a clear risk of a serious breach 
of the rule of law exists in Poland within the 
meaning of Article 7(1) of the Treaty on 
European Union. The Commission also set out 
the ways in which this risk could be addressed. 
. Poland’s efforts to increase the economy’s 
innovative capacity have not yet translated 
into a significant rise in innovative outputs. 
Developing the science base is a critical 
challenge for improving scientific excellence 
and translating it into innovative market results. 
A number of steps towards increasing private 
sector innovation have been taken, including 
tax incentives for R&D expenditures. Their 
effects, however, risk being delayed by limited 
collaboration between business and research 
institutions, among other factors. 
. Poland continues to develop its 
infrastructure. The road network continues to 
improve, with the support of EU funds. 
Modernisation of the railway network is also 
progressing, although slowed by a lack of long-
term planning and shortcomings in investment 
project management. Fixed broadband 
coverage is low and only partially offset by 
mobile broadband take-up. 
. Poland faces challenges in moving towards 
cleaner energy sources. The electricity sector 
relies heavily on coal-fired generation. The 
transition to cleaner sources risks being 
delayed by legislative changes that in some 
areas impose de facto prohibitive conditions for 
renewable energy installations. Limiting 
greenhouse gas emissions from energy, 
transport and industry remains a key concern 
from a climate perspective. High air pollution 
remains a major health-related concern. 



