EXECUTIVE SUMMARY Between May 2011 and June 2014, Portugal benefited from financial assistance in support of an economic adjustment programme which also covered the surveillance of imbalances and monitoring of corrective measures. Portugal is still affected by very high private and government debt, vulnerability of the financial sector due to weak bank profitability and an ongoing deterioration of asset quality, limited access of corporations to credit, high levels of unemployment and bottlenecks in network industries, services, regulated professions and public administration. These weaknesses constitute risks for economic growth and financial stability, thus requiring decisive policy actions.  This Country Report assesses Portugal's economy against the background of the Commission's Annual Growth Survey, which recommends three main pillars for the EU's economic and social policy in 2015: investment, structural reforms, and fiscal responsibility. In line with the Investment Plan for Europe, it also explores ways to maximise the impact of public resources and unlock private investment. Finally, it assesses Portugal in the light of the findings of the 2015 Alert Mechanism Report, in which the Commission found it useful to further examine the existence of macroeconomic imbalances or their unwinding. To this end, this Country Report also provides an in-depth review (IDR) of Portugal's economy in line with the scope of the surveillance under the Macroeconomic Imbalances Procedure. The main findings from the IDR analysis as regards imbalances and macroeconomic risks are:  • Portugal tackled thoroughly its external imbalances but, starting from deep-seated external weaknesses, the rebalancing is still ongoing. The traditionally high structural current account deficit has been closed, exports increased, helped also by improved efficiency and product quality, and the tradables sector gained in importance. However, the net international investment position is still very negative and rebalancing through sustained current account surpluses will not only take time but requires stronger economic growth, higher exports, and more attractiveness for foreign direct investment.  • The high debt of Portuguese firms still weighs on firms' performance and impedes new investments, one of the key priorities of the new Commission, while households' indebtedness declined markedly. Deteriorating growth prospects and changing attitudes towards risk have prompted non.financial corporations to adjust their balance sheets, although to a lesser extent than households.. The high corporate debt ratio represents also a concern for banks’ balance sheets and Portugal's wider financial stability. • General government debt has reached very high levels, also by bringing off-budget operations on record. While the increasing path in gross public debt is expected to reverse in the short term, government debt dynamics remain vulnerable to adverse shocks and impose a high interest burden on public finances.  • The economic crisis has led to a sharp decline in employment. Although the labour market situation has recently improved, unemployment remains high and the labour market segmented. However, the economy experienced a substantial real wage adjustment in recent years, and Portugal's real effective exchange rate trends are conducive to falling unemployment and the necessary further external rebalancing. Yet there is a risk that unemployment stabilises at high levels in a low growth environment. The Country Report also analyses other macroeconomic and structural issues, and the main findings are: • Portugal is advancing reforms of the fiscal system. This applies for strengthening the fiscal framework and implementing new measures to fight tax fraud and evasion and reforms of the public administration, including at the local and regional level. Initiatives to improve the operating balance of state-owned enterprises continue and renegotiations of several Public-Private Partnerships are near conclusion. The sustainability of state-owned hospitals is being addressed, but their stock of arrears is still high. Executive summary • Portugal is making some progress with structural reforms. In the energy sector, excessive rents and the electricity tariff debt are being addressed. Several infrastructure projects listed in Portugal's long-term transport plan are progressing. Reforms of product markets, services and regulated professions are advancing, although not in a comprehensive way. However, the lack of a systematic approach to monitoring and evaluating reforms makes it difficult to assess their full impact on the functioning of the economy.  Overall, Portugal has made some progress in addressing the 2014 country-specific recommendations. Decisive measures have been taken to stabilise the financial sector and to overhaul the corporate insolvency and debt restructuring framework. Active Labour Market Policies have been strengthened. The assessment of recent reforms of collective bargaining is mixed, as not all of them promote the alignment of wages and productivity at firm level. No progress has been achieved on strengthening social assistance, including the minimum income scheme. Education and training have undergone important reforms and implementation is now crucial to prove their effectiveness in improving students' performance. Network industries are still facing efficiency and sustainability challenges. Housing, product and services markets reforms are facing delays, especially the full implementation of the European Services Directive. While the competition and regulatory framework is being improved, no progress has been made in reducing the late payment of commercial debts by the administration. Some progress has been made to increase transparency in public procurement and the judiciary. The country report reveals the policy challenges stemming from the analysis of macro-economic imbalances:  • Low competition in product markets and low responsiveness of wages to productivity at the firm level impact on the competitiveness of exports and thus on external imbalances.  • Slow restructuring of highly indebted but viable companies and slow orderly exit of those firms that have no viable operating models keep the corporate debt levels high. • Relying on cyclical effects does not facilitate compliance with the medium-term budget framework or help to reduce the high public debt level in a sustainable manner. • Labour market policies and the functioning of the collective bargaining system influence the risk that unemployment stabilises at its current high level. Other challenges are:  • Coverage of social assistance is low. • Education and training outcomes are not clearly aligned with the labour market and links between public research organisations and business are weak. • In the transport sector, the new transport regulatory authority is not operational yet. Liberalisation measures in ports concessions, railways and metropolitan public transport are slow, thus not stimulating investment. 