EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 



The Portuguese economy has continued to 
recover both in terms of growth and 
employment. Economic activity has accelerated 
and has become more broad-based, with 
investment and exports picking up. Employment 
grew even faster than GDP, particularly in labour-
intensive services while wage growth remained 
subdued. Imbalances are receding in the context of 
favourable macroeconomic and financial 
conditions, but public and private debt and the 
negative net external position remain at high 
levels. Challenges also remain in terms of labour 
productivity, the still high income inequality and 
labour market segmentation as well as the low 
level of investment. Addressing these challenges 
would reduce the risk of a slowdown, should the 
external environment and financial conditions 
become less supportive. (1) 

(1) This report assesses Portugal’s economy in light of the 
European Commission’s Annual Growth Survey published 
on 22 November 2017. In the survey, the Commission calls 
on EU Member States to implement reforms to make the 
European economy more productive, resilient and 
inclusive. In so doing, Member States should focus their 
efforts on the three elements of the virtuous triangle of 
economic policy — boosting investment, pursuing 
structural reforms and ensuring responsible fiscal policies. 
At the same time, the Commission published the Alert 
Mechanism Report (AMR) that initiated the seventh round 
of the macroeconomic imbalance procedure. The AMR 
found that Portugal warranted an in-depth review, which is 
presented in this report. 

Portugal's recovery has strengthened. Real GDP 
growth is estimated at 2.7 % in 2017, up from 
1.5 % in 2016, driven by acceleration in 
investment and exports. Private consumption 
remains an important contributor to growth but is 
expected to slow down slightly over the medium 
term, and the net external trade contribution to 
growth is expected to become broadly neutral. 
GDP growth is projected to slow down to 2.2 % in 
2018 and 1.9 % in 2019 as positive cyclical effects 
are projected to fade away and output approaches 
its potential. 

Higher revenue and lower interest rates enabled 
the headline deficit to be further reduced while 
the structural deficit remains broadly stable. 
The favourable economic cycle together with the 
decline in interest payments would allow for 
reductions in the structural deficit to ensure a 
sustainable budgetary position over the medium 
term. However, the currently planned structural 
adjustment lacks ambition. Containing expenditure 

growth and using gains from lower interest 
expenditure would help accelerate public debt 
reduction. 

Portugal has made some (2) progress in 
addressing the 2017 country-specific 
recommendations. In the area of public finances 
there was limited progress in improving the 
financial sustainability of state owned enterprises 
and in decreasing health sector arrears. Some 
progress can be seen in the broadening of the 
spending review and in the pension system. While 
limited progress was observed in measures to 
promote hiring on open-ended contracts there was 
some progress in activation of long-term 
unemployed people and on the minimum wage 
whose increases so far have not affected job 
creation. In the financial sector there was some 
progress in implementing a strategy addressing 
non-performing loans and improving access to 
capital. Limited progress was observed in 
decreasing administrative burden and tackle 
regulatory barriers in construction and business 
services. But some progress was made in 
improving insolvency and tax proceedings. 

(2) Information on the level of progress and actions taken to 
address the policy advice in each respective subpart of a 
CSR is presented in the Overview Table in the Annex. 

Regarding progress in reaching the national targets 
under the Europe 2020 strategy, Portugal is 
performing well in greenhouse gas emissions 
reduction, renewable energy and energy efficiency 
targets and increasing the employment rate (73% 
in 2017). The early school leaving rate dropped 
significantly in previous years, but slightly 
increased in 2016 and remains well above the EU 
average. There are still considerable obstacles to 
achieving the targets on R&D investment, tertiary 
education attainment and poverty reduction. 

Portugal faces challenges with regard to a 
number of indicators of the Social Scoreboard 
supporting the European Pillar of Social Rights. 
The high share of people at risk of poverty and 
social exclusion is declining, but the impact of 
social transfers (other than pensions) on poverty 
reduction is limited. Income inequality has also 
started to subside but remains high, in a context 
where household disposable income is still below 
pre-crisis levels. While employment keeps 
recovering steadily, labour market segmentation 


remains a serious challenge, with young people 
particularly affected. The level of digital skills 
among the adult population is also below the EU 
average. On the upside, Portugal does well in 
terms of participation of children in formal 
childcare and has recently taken measures to 
promote work-life balance. 

The main findings of the in-depth review 
contained in this report and the related policy 
challenges are as follows: 

. The external position has been improving on 
the back of current account surpluses and 
higher nominal growth. The net international 
investment position was still negative at 
-104.7 % of GDP at the end of 2016, but is 
decreasing thanks to small but continuous 
current account surpluses and a pickup in 
growth. Current account surpluses will need to 
be sustained for an extended period of time to 
decisively bring down the still very high 
external liabilities. 
. Public debt started decreasing from a high 
level and further fiscal consolidation would 
contribute to ensuring a steady decline. With 
no further bank recapitalisations expected, 
public debt is estimated to have started 
decreasing to reach 126.4 % of GDP in 2017. 
Ensuring public debt sustainability in the 
medium and long term hinges on a structural 
improvement in public finances and a 
sustainable budgetary consolidation. In this 
context, progress in broadening the spending 
review is set to have a positive effect, which 
could be larger with even more ambitious 
savings targets. In a similar vein, controlling 
expenditure, managing debt and improving the 
financial sustainability of state-owned 
enterprises are essential aspects to improve 
public finances. At the same time, the 
sustainability of the pension and health systems 
remains important with hospital arrears 
representing a particular challenge. 
. Private indebtedness is decreasing at an 
appropriate pace linked mainly to faster 
economic growth though the debt stock is also 
decreasing in absolute values. Household and 
corporate debt ratios are declining but are still 
beyond prudent levels weighing negatively on 
investments and potential growth. 
. The adjustment process in the Portuguese 
banking sector is ongoing, but challenges 
remain, including a declining but still high 
stock of non-performing loans. Portuguese 
banks remain among the least capitalised and 
have lower profits than their EU counterparts. 
However, capital increases together with the 
ongoing efforts to reduce costs and asset 
quality improvement are improving financial 
sector prospects. While falling in absolute 
terms, the still high proportion of non-
performing loans (14.6 % in September 2017) 
remains a burden and a risk for banks' financial 
soundness. If not solved, it could be a barrier 
for new investments. A comprehensive strategy 
for a faster reduction of non-performing assets 
is therefore being implemented. Quicker 
winding-up of non-viable firms through 
insolvency procedures and a secondary market 
for non-performing loans could free credit 
supply for new investments and lower risks to 
the banking sector. 
. Employment is fast increasing contributing 
to a decrease in total unemployment while 
wage pressure remains low. The labour 
market continued to improve strongly in 2017 
benefitting from the job-rich recovery. 
Unemployment declined considerably from 
11.2 % in 2016 to 9 % in 2017 and is now 
lower than the euro area average. The 
employment rate reached its highest level since 
2008. This has not put significant pressure on 
wages as most of the job openings were in 
sectors with low-skill profiles and lower-than-
average salaries. In addition, some labour 
market slack still persists, preventing wage 
growth from a significant increase. Youth and 
long-term unemployment remain a concern. 
. Labour productivity growth remains 
sluggish in the medium term, limiting the 
potential to converge towards the EU average. 
While total factor productivity is estimated as a 
major contributor to potential growth, value 
added per employee dropped further in 2017 
due mainly to the high number of jobs created 
in labour intensive sectors such as tourism-
related services and residential construction. 



The relatively low-skill level of the labour 
force, small size of firms and other bottlenecks 
in the product and labour markets remain 
significant barriers to productivity increases. 
The low share of investment in GDP also 
contributed to a labour productivity slowdown. 


Other key structural issues analysed in this report, 
which point to particular challenges for Portugal’s 
economy, are the following: 

. Minimum wage increases have supported 
the incomes of low-wage workers and do not 
seem to negatively affect job creation. In 
particular, the minimum wage increases have 
not prevented the employment rate of low-
skilled workers from rebounding during the 
recovery, also thanks to expansion in labour-
intensive sectors such as tourism and 
construction. Nevertheless, risks remain 
concerning the employability of this segment 
of workers. The compression of the wage 
structure decreases the education premium, 
reducing also the incentive for workers to 
upgrade their skills. The Government and 
social partners keep monitoring the impact of 
minimum wage developments. 
. Despite an increase in permanent hiring, the 
proportion of workers on temporary 
contracts is high. This raises doubts on the 
effectiveness of recent measures to tackle 
labour market segmentation. Hiring workers on 
temporary contracts is widespread with a large 
wage gap between temporary and permanent 
employees. While new measures to address 
segmentation are subject to discussions with 
social partners, no action is currently planned 
to review the legal framework for dismissals. 
. Poverty and inequality indicators have 
improved further. The at-risk-of-poverty or 
social exclusion rate is getting closer to the EU 
average and the income share of the poorest 
20 % increased since 2015. Despite the strong 
redistributive effect of the tax and benefit 
system, the level of income inequality is high. 
The effectiveness of social transfers (excluding 
pensions) in lifting people out of poverty is 
low. The adequacy of the minimum income 
scheme has been improved but remains limited 
while housing affordability is an increasing 
challenge for low-income households. 
. Programmes are being rolled out and 
reforms implemented in Vocational 
Education and Training to upgrade the 
skills of the adult population. Their 
effectiveness in upgrading worker's basic skills 
(numeracy, literacy and digital) and ultimately 
raising productivity will depend on the 
coverage and quality of the training offered, 
going beyond the mere recognition of skills. 
The National Digital Competences Initiative 
aims to strengthen digital literacy, yet it is too 
early to ascertain its impact. Early school 
leaving has decreased significantly in the last 
decade, but is still above the EU average and 
slightly increased in 2016. Young people from 
a disadvantaged socioeconomic background 
show on average lower educational 
achievements. While the attainment of 
qualifications in tertiary education is 
increasing, the employability of recent 
graduates is below average. 
. Measures to improve the business 
environment have been put in place, but 
regulatory restrictions remain in business 
services. New credit lines and programmes 
matching firms with equity investors, are 
improving the business environment, including 
SMEs access to capital. Capital financing is 
however limited. Administrative burden is 
decreasing thanks to simplification 
programmes. Restrictions in business services 
are being assessed but so far no action has been 
taken and regulatory barriers in professional 
services still restrict competition. Case backlog 
in courts is decreasing but time in court 
remains long, in particular for insolvent firms, 
and the system’s performance scores low 
compared with the EU average. Construction 
investment is increasing due to raising demand, 
but sector restrictions remain. Corruption and 
transparency in public procurement are still 
perceived by businesses as areas of concern. 
. Improvements in network industries and 
business digitisation are visible while there is 
room for improvement in innovation. Key 
bottlenecks remain in the innovation system, 
such as barriers for university-business 



