1. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY After two years of decline, real GDP in Romania is estimated to have grown in 2011 by 2.%. For 2012, on the back of a slowdown in Europe, growth is expected to slowdown to 1.4 %; domestic demand is forecast to be the major driver of growth and investment, supported by improving EU funds absorption, is expected to play a key role in 2012.  In the context of the EU's precautionary medium-term financial assistance agreed in 2011 for two years, Romania has undertaken to implement a comprehensive economic-policy programme with a particular focus on structural reform measures aimed at improving the functioning of labour and product markets and at increasing the resilience and growth potential of the Romanian economy. In parallel, the programme ensures the continuation of fiscal consolidation, the reform of the tax administration and improvements in public financial management and control as well as financial-stability and financial-market reform.  The results of the second formal programme review that took place in late April-early May 2012 are satisfactory and the current precautionary financial assistance programme remains on track. The cash fiscal target for 2011 was met, while the ESA target would have been met had there not been a sizeable one-off measure linked to court decisions obliging the government to pay compensation to certain categories of employees. The 2012 budget remains on track to achieve a deficit below 3 % of GDP in ESA terms. The authorities will also have to continue implementing sound fiscal policies. The Romanian banking sector has remained resilient, in spite of the on-going deterioration in asset quality. Progress in key structural reform areas has been uneven but overall satisfactory. In particular, reforms in the energy sector have recently gathered momentum. Programme implementation could, however, be improved in several areas. Concerning the national targets under the Europe 2020 strategy, Romania has made limited progress in 2011. Some of the targets remain difficult to reach. This is the case in particular for investments in R&D, the employment rate, the early school leaving rate and the number of people at risk of poverty or exclusion. Romania should step up efforts to accelerate the delivery of the Europe 2020 strategy as the basis for any new growth initiative.    3 