EXECUTIVE SUMMARY Under successive assistance programmes key macroeconomic imbalances in Romania concerning the current account and fiscal policy have been considerably reduced and financial sector stability has been maintained. The balance of payments financial assistance programmes were successful in restoring macroeconomic stability, re-establishing market access for the sovereign and safeguarding financial stability. After a sharp contraction during the crisis, growth recovered quickly and is back in positive territory since 2011. Growth reached 2.9 % in 2014 and is expected to remain robust. Unemployment remained contained at around 7 % while inflation recently decreased significantly. Fiscal consolidation was frontloaded but spread over various years. The current-account deficit of more than 10 % in 2006-08 was largely corrected to around 1 % of GDP in 2013 on the back of strong exports and only temporarily reduced imports. This correction contributed to improving the (negative) net international investment position to 60 % of GDP. The banking sector weathered the crisis well and capitalisation remains strong. This Country Report assesses Romania's economy against the background of the Commission's Annual Growth Survey. The Survey recommends three main pillars for the EU's economic and social policy in 2015: investment, structural reforms, and fiscal responsibility. In line with the Investment Plan for Europe, it also explores ways to maximise the impact of public resources and unlock private investment. So far, surveillance of economic policies for Romania has taken place under the programmes. In its 2015 Alert Mechanism Report, the Commission found it necessary to determine whether macroeconomic imbalances exist in Romania. This Country Report thus also assesses Romania in the light of the findings of the 2015 Alert Mechanism Report. To this end the Country Report also provides an in-depth review of Romania. The main findings of the In-Depth Review contained in this Country Report are: • While Romania’s net international investment position indicates some remaining risks, key imbalances have been corrected. The still significantly negative net international investment position remains a source of macroeconomic vulnerability. However, export growth points to improved macroeconomic resilience. Formerly unsustainable current-account deficits have been corrected and are expected to remain contained. Labour productivity started to improve only recently, and cost competitiveness is still not ensured. Non-cost competitiveness is still hampered by low investment and innovation and an unfavourable business environment. • Despite important reforms, deficiencies in the business environment might threaten much needed investment and Romania’s export capacity. Structural funds could significantly contribute to financing important investments, but implementation continues to face major obstacles. Access to finance remains difficult, particularly for small and medium.sized enterprises. Energy and transport infrastructure continues to be a bottleneck to growth. Insufficient quality of education and its mismatch with the labour market, limited public administration capacity and an unstable tax policy constrain investments and exports. Inefficiencies in state-owned enterprises dominating key sectors like energy and transport are a burden on public finances and a drag to the entire economy. • Private debt has been contained and financial sector stability has been preserved, but external and internal vulnerabilities remain. The Romanian banking sector is well capitalised and liquid, and non-performing loans are on a decreasing trend. Still, deleveraging pressures remain and impaired loans weigh on banks’ profitability. Banks remain vulnerable to adverse developments in the euro area and particularly to home-grown initiatives which may have an adverse impact on the sector that could be mitigated under the balance of payments programme. Private-sector indebtedness remains contained. The Country Report also analyses macroeconomic and structural issues and the findings are: • Tax compliance remains limited, while tax policy is rather unstable. Although measures to increase the efficiency of the tax Executive summary administration are being implemented, value added tax compliance is among the lowest in the EU and undeclared work weighs on budget revenues. Frequent changes to the tax system contribute to instability in the business environment. • Labour-market dynamics show signs of improvement, but structural issues persist. Poverty and social exclusion continue to affect a large proportion of the population. Unemployment is low and decreasing, but this is mostly due to persistently low activity rates. Access to the labour market by vulnerable groups remains difficult and the quality and access to early childhood education and care, vocational training, apprenticeships, higher education, and lifelong learning are low. The capacity of the National Employment Agency is a constraint. Despite important actions, youth unemployment and inactivity rates remain high. Romania has the highest proportion of the population working in agriculture in the EU, with substantial under-employment in subsistence and semi-subsistence farms. Although declining, a large proportion of the population is severely materially deprived. Effectiveness of social transfers is limited. The Roma population experiences worse employment and social outcomes. Children's rights are often not effectively enforced. Healthcare reforms have been stepped up, but healthcare outcomes, accessibility and efficient use of resources remain an issue, in particular in rural areas. • Persistent weaknesses in public administration and in the overall business environment weigh on the country’s economy. Important reforms aimed at increasing the quality of public services and the predictability and quality of policies, and at achieving a regulatory environment more favourable to business and citizens have been approved, but concrete measures are not yet fully implemented. Consolidating progress on the efficiency, quality and independence of the judicial system and in the fight against corruption remains a challenge. Overall, Romania has made limited progress in addressing country-specific recommendations. Implementation of measures envisaged under the balance of payments programme is uneven. Preliminary data puts the 2014 deficit in line with programme objectives; the 2015 budget targets Romania’s medium-term objective of a deficit of 1 % of GDP in structural terms (plus a so-called EU funds adjustor of 0.25 % of GDP); clearance of non-performing loans is progressing; the balance.sheet assessment in the insurance sector is on track; and gas-price liberalisation for non.households comes into effect from 2015. Yet, various reforms have stalled, including privatisations, restructuring of loss-making state.owned enterprises, the adoption of covered bonds legislation, the setting-up of specialised courts for cases involving unfair contract terms, transparent minimum wage setting, equalisation of the pension age of men and women, and improvements in the business environment. In addition, achievements relating to the governance of state-owned enterprises are at risk, and the previously introduced pension reform is threatened by the planned reintroduction of 'special pensions'. There has been limited progress in streamlining energy efficiency policies, cross-border integration of energy networks and physical reverse flows in gas interconnections, and energy price liberalisation for households was delayed. The cut in social security contributions lowered the tax wedge, but it was not targeted at low- and middle-income earners. The Country Report reveals the following policy challenges stemming from the analysis of macroeconomic imbalances. Risks for maintaining fiscal policy and financial sector stability remain, but can be subdued by implementing in full the agreements reached in the balance of payments programme and by ensuring a smooth transition to post-programme surveillance, including strengthening domestic anchors. The main challenges ahead regard: accelerating the pace of structural reforms to improve competitiveness and expand growth; building-up public research capacities in order to develop new sources of growth through research and innovation in the middle term; making best use of EU structural funds to enhance investment, innovation, and employment. 