EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 



In the absence of structural reforms and fiscal 
consolidation, Romania's buoyant economic 
growth risks setting the stage for a hard 
landing. The current economic boom has been 
driven mainly by consumption, while investment 
has remained subdued. The strong economic 
upswing represents an opportunity to rebuild fiscal 
buffers and prepare the economy for leaner times. 
Inequality and poverty rates remain high despite 
the strong economic growth. Some structural 
reforms were reversed in 2017 while others stalled. 
The progress made in the fight against corruption 
was again put at risk. Ensuring continuity of past 
reforms would support Romania's transformation 
to a higher value added economy and could 
improve the economy's resilience to an eventual 
downturn (1). 

(1) This report assesses Romania’s economy in the light of the 
European Commission’s Annual Growth Survey published 
on 22 November 2017. In the survey, the Commission calls 
on EU Member States to implement reforms to make the 
European economy more productive, resilient and 
inclusive. In so doing, Member States should focus their 
efforts on the three elements of the virtuous triangle of 
economic policy — boosting investment, pursuing 
structural reforms and ensuring responsible fiscal policies. 

 

The economy's cyclical upswing continued in 
2017 but is expected to ease off in 2018. Real 
GDP growth accelerated in 2017 to a post-crisis 
high on the back of booming private consumption, 
spurred by wage hikes in both the public and 
private sector and indirect tax cuts. Growth is 
forecast to decelerate but stay above potential. 
Despite export market share gains, the growth of 
imports has outpaced that of exports and the 
current account deficit is widening. Inflation 
turned positive in 2017 and is forecast to 
accelerate. 

The labour market has been tightening in line 
with the strong economic growth. Employment 
growth was positive in 2017 (0.7 %) and the 
unemployment rate dropped to 4.9 %, its lowest 
level in more than 20 years. The low 
unemployment rate, coupled with a declining 
labour force and persistent skills shortages, has led 
to very tight labour market conditions. The 
compensation of employees is low relative to the 
EU average but the strong wage growth of 2017, 
also driven by a 16 % minimum wage hike and 
public sector wage increases, risks putting pressure 
on competitiveness and inflation, if not 

accompanied by corresponding productivity 
increases. 

Due to tax cuts and increases in public wages 
and pensions, the public deficit is on an 
increasing path. Indirect taxes were cut in 2017 
while the personal income tax rate was cut from 
January 2018. On the expenditure side, public 
wages and old-age pensions were significantly 
increased in 2017 and are set to advance further in 
2018. As a consequence, the nominal and 
structural budget deficits are on an increasing path, 
causing Romania to diverge from the targets in its 
national fiscal framework. In 2017 the Council 
launched a significant deviation procedure 
addressed to Romania. 

The financial sector has further strengthened, 
whereas some segments need monitoring. The 
banking sector remains well-capitalised and its 
overall health, including asset quality, has 
continued to improve. However, recurrent 
legislative initiatives warrant close monitoring. 
The insurance sector is strengthening, as the 
measures to address the financial situation of 
weaker companies have started to bear fruit. The 
recent reduction in the contributions to the pre-
funded second pillar pension funds, which have 
displayed strong performance since they were set 
up, eased short term fiscal concerns but could have 
negative implications for the development of 
capital markets. 

Romania has made limited progress on 
addressing the 2017 country-specific 
recommendations. No progress was made on 
ensuring that the national fiscal framework is 
implemented and there was limited progress in 
strengthening tax compliance and collection. By 
contrast, there was some progress on fighting 
undeclared work while limited progress was made 
on strengthening targeted labour activation 
measures. No progress was made on how the 
minimum wage is set and on equalising the 
pensionable age for men and women. Limited 
progress was made on improving access to quality 
mainstream education. In the healthcare system, 
limited progress was made on shifting to outpatient 
care and some progress was achieved on curbing 
informal payments. There was limited progress on 
adopting legislation to ensure a professional and 
independent civil service and on prioritising public 
investment. Finally, some progress was made on 


implementing the national public procurement 
strategy, but sustainability of measures and 
irreversibility of reforms should be further 
monitored. 

Regarding progress in reaching the national targets 
under the Europe 2020 strategy, Romania is 
performing well in the areas of employment rates, 
national greenhouse gas emission, renewable 
energy, energy efficiency and tertiary education. 
The national target for reducing the number of 
people at risk of poverty or social exclusion has 
already been reached. However, research and 
development intensity and early school leaving 
remain some distance away from their respective 
targets. 

Romania faces challenges with regard to a 
number of indicators of the Social Scoreboard 
supporting the European Pillar of Social Rights. 
The high economic growth has translated into 
improved employment outcomes and resulted in a 
strong increase of household disposable incomes. 
However, Romania has a high number of early 
school leavers, and young people not in education, 
employment or training. Romania has not yet 
achieved a mature social dialogue, and on social 
protection and inclusion, challenges remain. 

Key structural issues analysed in this report, which 
point to particular challenges for Romania's 
economy, are the following: 

. Labour and skills supply are not keeping up 
with the fast-changing needs of the economy. 
Romania's unfavourable demographic trends 
are expected to continue. Population aging, 
limited internal labour mobility and continued 
emigration represent a significant drag on 
potential economic growth. Despite recent 
improvements, labour force participation rates 
remain well below EU averages. This concerns 
particularly women, older people, Roma, 
young people, and people in rural areas. Active 
labour market policies are insufficient in scope 
and design. Skills shortages and mismatches 
have an adverse impact on competitiveness and 
convergence. Undeclared work continues to 
distort the labour market. Minimum wage 
increases are decided in a discretionary manner 
while social partners' involvement in policy-
making is very limited, with no substantive 
process of involvement and cooperation. 
Collective bargaining rates are low. 
. Poverty increased and income inequality 
remains high. Inequality of opportunity 
remains a challenge, especially for rural areas. 
Income inequality is high, while the 
redistributive effect of the tax and benefit 
system is below the EU average. The limited 
integration of employment, education and 
social services prevents disadvantaged groups 
from escaping poverty. The provision of 
services is limited, especially in disadvantaged 
areas. Child poverty is high and rising. The 
entry into force of the Law on minimum 
inclusion income that would increase the 
adequacy and coverage of social benefits was 
postponed again to 2019. Legislation 
equalising pension ages for men and women 
has not been adopted. The adopted shift of 
social security contributions places the burden 
of financing social protection almost entirely 
on employees. Access to social protection for 
all is not ensured. 
. No tangible results were achieved on public 
administration reforms, and the business 
environment shows weaknesses. Draft 
legislation on human resource management is 
currently aligned with the strategy for civil 
servants but implementation has not started and 
results are expected only in 2019. The public 
consultation process, strategic and budgetary 
planning as well as the use of regulatory impact 
assessments remains weak, limiting evidence-
based policy making. Cumbersome 
administrative procedures for businesses, slow 
progress in the provision of e-government 
solutions, complex insolvency procedures and 
frequent regulatory changes with limited use of 
impact assessment and consultation procedures 
weigh on the business environment. 
. The weak performance of the education 
system limits growth prospects in the long 
run. Low attainment levels in basic skills and 
digital skills, persistently high early school 
leaving, poor Roma inclusion and rural-urban 
disparities in education result in lost human 
capital and growth potential. Quality assurance 
and initial teacher education programmes face 
challenges. Vocational education and training 



remains a second choice option and in most 
cases is not adapted to labour market needs. 
Access to adult learning is limited, in particular 
for the low-skilled. 
. The health status of the population has 
improved, but remains below EU standards. 
Access to healthcare remains a key challenge, 
also in relation to equality of opportunities, 
with negative repercussions on child 
development, workforce employability and 
healthy ageing. Low funding and inefficient 
use of public resources limit the health 
system's effectiveness, against the background 
of a sizeable shortage of doctors and nurses. 
Health infrastructure and the prevalence of 
informal payments remain sources of concern. 
. Performance in the area of research and 
innovation remains modest. Despite a solid 
IT infrastructure and the rapid development of 
the ICT sector, Romania continues to score low 
on all European Innovation Scoreboard 
indicators and there are no signs of improving 
performance. The degree of digitisation of both 
the public and private sector remain very low. 
Despite increasing public funding and a 
dynamic start-up ecosystem, technology 
adoption, internationalisation and scaling-up of 
companies remain significant challenges. The 
weak innovation performance could have a 
negative impact on growth prospects. 
. High public spending is not reflected in the 
country's infrastructure. Despite relatively 
high public investment rates, the supply of 
infrastructure is limited, with the perceived 
quality of infrastructure being one of the lowest 
in the EU. The general condition and reliability 
of road and rail infrastructure remain poor and 
the reform of the transport sector progresses 
very slowly. Water, waste and energy 
infrastructure remain deficient. State-owned 
enterprises’ efficiency is not improving and the 
corporate governance framework is being 
weakened. Public investment is characterised 
by low efficiency particularly in project 
preparation and prioritisation and public 
procurement. Businesses see investment in 
infrastructure as a major priority for public 
spending. 
. The irreversibility of the progress in the 
fight against corruption was recently put at 
risk. The continued good results of the judicial 
institutions in the fight against corruption were 
largely brought into question by events 
throughout the past year. The ongoing reforms 
of the justice laws risk harming judicial 
independence and undoing progress achieved 
over the past 10 years. Moreover, judicial 
institutions and the legal framework for 
fighting corruption crimes continue to be under 
intense pressure. 


 


