EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 



Slovenia's successful rebalancing sets the 
ground for addressing medium and long-term 
challenges. The sources of imbalances that led to 
the deep crisis of 2012-2013 have rapidly receded, 
also due to sustained policy action. The economy 
is now growing robustly. Addressing remaining 
weaknesses in the banking and corporate sector, 
unleashing investment and productivity growth 
and reforming the pension, health and long-term 
care systems remain key priorities to put the 
economy on a dynamic and sustainable growth 
path. (1) 

(1) This report assesses Sloveniaís economy in the light of the 
European Commissionís Annual Growth Survey published 
on 22 November 2017. In the survey, the Commission calls 
on EU Member States to implement reforms to make the 
European economy more productive, resilient and 
inclusive. In so doing, Member States should focus their 
efforts on the three elements of the virtuous triangle of 
economic policy ó boosting investment, pursuing 
structural reforms and ensuring responsible fiscal policies. 
At the same time, the Commission published the Alert 
Mechanism Report (AMR) that initiated the seventh round 
of the macroeconomic imbalance procedure. The AMR 
found that Slovenia warranted an in-depth review, which is 
presented in this report. 

Slovenia is getting on a balanced growth path. 
In 2012-2014, the country suffered from serious 
problems in the banking sector and embarked on a 
painful corporate deleveraging process. The 
economy rebalanced rapidly afterwards, also 
helped by the well-designed policy measures, and 
since 2016 it has enjoyed sustained growth. 
Slovenia has maintained its price-competitiveness 
and the improving external environment is clearly 
reflected in the growth of exports. The expected 
account surplus is 5.9 % of GDP in 2017 and the 
net international investment position improved. 

The labour market is strengthening. 
Employment continued to rise, unemployment 
further decreased and labour shortages increased. 
The tightening labour market is putting some 
upward pressure on wages, but wage growth 
remains moderate and in line with productivity 
developments. Due to positive economic 
developments the rate of people at risk of poverty 
and social exclusion continued to decrease. 

The sources of imbalances have been reduced in 
a sustainable manner. The banking sector is 
improving due to better solvency, profitability and 
asset quality. Non-performing loans declined by 

almost a third in 2017 compared to 2016. Credit 
growth has turned positive and investments are 
expected to drive Sloveniaís economic growth in 
2018 and 2019. Government finances are expected 
to be in balance in 2018. Public debt continues to 
decline and is expected to reach 72 % of GDP in 
2019, 10 percentage points below its peak in 2015. 

This positive outlook opens up opportunities to 
increase the growth potential of the economy. 
Labour productivity growth in Slovenia has fallen 
over the past 15 years as a result of both cyclical 
and structural factors. Due to ageing, the labour 
force is shrinking. Investment and technological 
progress will therefore be crucial to the countryís 
future growth. 

There remain major long-term challenges 
linked to the ageing of the society. Expenditure 
on public pensions, health care and long-term care 
puts large pressure on the public finances in the 
long term. 

Slovenia has made some (2) progress in 
addressing the 2017 country-specific 
recommendations. Political consensus, including 
with social partners, regarding the path towards 
pension reform has been reached. Some laws on 
reforms to the healthcare sector have been adopted 
while the key legislation (Health care and health 
insurance Act) has not been adopted yet. A 
proposal for reforming the long-term care has been 
publicly consulted but not yet put forward. 
Aggregated procurement is being used more 
widely in the healthcare sector. Some measures to 
increase employment of older and low-skilled 
workers were adopted. Significant work has been 
done to achieve the durable resolution of non-
performing loans. The new legislative package to 
improve the planning and building process will 
also be in force from mid-2018. Supported by EU 
funds and the European Fund for Strategic 
Investments, new alternative financing sources 
have been developed recently. 

(2) Information on the level of progress and actions taken to 
address the policy advice in each respective subpart of a 
CSR is presented in the Overview Table in the Annex. 

Regarding progress in reaching the national targets 
under the Europe 2020, Slovenia has already 
achieved or is well on track to achieving its 


national targets for early school leaving rates, 
tertiary educational attainment, energy efficiency 
and greenhouse gas emissions. The employment 
rate (ages 20-64) increased by 1 percentage point 
to 70.1 % in 2016, moving closer to the 75 % 
target. The number of people at risk of poverty and 
social exclusion declined further in 2016, but it is 
still above the 2008 level. On the negative side, 
Slovenia moved further away from its R&D 
intensity target. 

Slovenia performs relatively well on the 
indicators of the Social Scoreboard supporting 
the European Pillar of Social Rights. Income 
inequalities are low. The risk of poverty and social 
exclusion has decreased over the last years. 
However, old-age poverty still prevails. Despite 
improvements in labour market outcomes, the 
employment rates of older workers and low-skilled 
remain low. Outcomes are strong on education and 
training. 

The main findings of the in-depth review 
contained in this report, and the related policy 
challenges, are as follows: 

. The banking sector has been strengthened. 
The non-performing loans ratio declined by 
almost a third in 2017. Banks are profitable, 
well capitalised and have a favourable funding 
structure. The reserves put in place by the 
banks to cover the potential losses on the 
remaining non-performing loans are increasing. 
In March 2017, a toolkit to prevent, identify 
and manage non-performing loans was issued 
by Bank of Slovenia. Remaining challenges are 
the continued monitoring of the restructured 
loans (the re-default rate was 27 % in 
March 2017) and the long-term profitability of 
banks given the current low interest 
environment. Privatising the NLB remains 
essential to prevent possible future credit 
misallocation and ensure its long-term 
viability. 
. Deleveraging in the corporate sector appears 
to have been completed and investment is 
growing. Since its peak at 115 % of GDP in 
2010, private sector debt decreased to 81.4 % 
in 2016. Household and corporate credit is now 
growing robustly. Private investment growth 
accelerated to 5% in 2016, supported by an 
increase in inward foreign direct investment. 
Nevertheless, the level of private investment, 
including foreign direct investment in Slovenia 
remains relatively low compared to peer 
countries. It therefore continues to pose a 
challenge for the economy. 
. Public debt decreased to 78.5 % of GDP in 
2016. The debt ratio is declining on the back of 
strong nominal GDP growth and a reduction in 
the general government deficit. However, long-
term sustainability remains a major challenge, 
as an ageing population is set to put 
considerable pressure on public finances. The 
legislation concerning pensions, the stable 
financing of the healthcare system and the 
reform of the long-term care system, which 
would address these problems, have not yet 
been adopted. 


Other key economic issues analysed in this report 
which point to particular challenges facing 
Sloveniaís economy are as follows: 

. The labour market continues to face 
challenges. The activity and employment rates 
of older workers remain among the lowest in 
the EU. Adult learning, although still slightly 
above the EU average, has been falling for the 
last seven years. Evaluation of active labour 
market policies shows that the majority of 
programmes are performing well. However, the 
participation rate of unemployed in the 
programmes is low. 
. The healthcare system needs stable funding 
and its efficiency needs to be improved. The 
healthcare system provides good outcomes but 
the ageing population is putting it and the 
long-term care system under strain. Therefore, 
increasing efficiency, including by aggregated 
procurement, is important to ensure the long-
term sustainability of public finances and 
continue providing high-quality care. If 
adopted, the Healthcare and Health Insurance 
Act would help achieve this objective. 
. The business environment and access to 
finance have improved but challenges 
remain. While useful new funding instruments 
have been devised, alternative sources of 
financing for start-ups, small businesses and 



scale-ups have only started to develop. 
Legislation to ease the planning and building 
processes has been adopted but administrative 
burden and restrictive product and service 
market regulation remain obstacles to growth 
and investment. There is room to enhance 
competition, professionalization and 
independent oversight in public procurement. 
Certain anti-corruption reforms are still 
pending. Efficiency in public research is 
hindered by difficulties to attract domestic and 
foreign talent and a lack of performance-based 
funding..



