Growth in Slovakia gathered pace in 2014, driven by a recovery in domestic demand, as both private consumption and investment picked up after several years of decline. Export growth, however, weakened, as demand from Slovakia's main trading partners declined. Overall, GDP is estimated to have grown by 2.4% in 2014, putting Slovakia among the better performers in the euro area. Employment grew throughout the year, but the unemployment rate remained above 13%. Inflation collapsed sharply in 2014, driven mainly by a fall in energy prices. Domestic demand is expected to remain the main motor of growth. Export growth, on the other hand, is projected to continue to slow down in 2015 due to weaker demand from Slovakia's trade partners and is only likely to recover in 2016. Labour market conditions are projected to improve in line with the recovery in economic activity, while inflation is expected to slowly increase over the coming two years. This Country Report assesses Slovakia's economy against the background of the Commission's Annual Growth Survey which recommends three main pillars for the EU's economic and social policy in 2015: investment, structural reforms, and fiscal responsibility. In line with the Investment Plan for Europe, it also explores ways to maximise the impact of public resources and unlock private investment. Finally, it assesses Slovakia in the light of the findings of the 2015 Alert Mechanism Report, in which the Commission found it useful to further examine the persistence of imbalances or their unwinding. The main observations and findings of the analysis are: . The long-term prospects of public finances have improved thanks to changes in taxation, the pension and healthcare systems, and the fiscal framework. Implemented measures of the Action Plan to fight tax fraud are already bearing fruit, particularly in collecting VAT revenue. Nevertheless, inefficiencies in tax collection and tax administration remain. The reform of the pension system has eased the expected pressure on public finances in the future, but the healthcare sector continues to be a drag on the public budget.  . The labour market showed signs of recovery in 2014, but unemployment remains high. Disincentives in the social-benefit system have been reduced and some positive results have been obtained in reducing youth unemployment, but long-term unemployment remains a major challenge. Employment among Roma and the low-skilled is low. The relevance of education to the labour market is low and the transition from education to employment is slow. . The country's long-term growth prospects are harmed by the lacklustre performance of investment since the onset of the crisis. The poor investment performance is also reflected in the relatively low quality of infrastructure, which puts a drag on growth in Slovakia's Central and Eastern regions.  . Slovakia's competitiveness is held back by lack of improvements in the ease of doing business. Slovakia continues to rank relatively poorly on several indicators of business environment quality, including the ease of starting a business and the ease of paying taxes. High electricity network charges result in high electricity prices for Slovak firms.  . The low efficiency of the public administration and of the justice system are not conducive to an efficient allocation of resources. The civil service suffers from high staff turnover and an inefficient management of human resources. Efforts to tackle corruption have so far been limited. Public procurement suffers from engrained deficiencies that affect the allocation of public resources. Overall, Slovakia has made limited progress in addressing the 2014 country-specific recommendations. There has been limited progress in improving the long-term sustainability of public finance by increasing the cost-effectiveness of the healthcare sector. No measures were taken to further strengthen the fiscal framework. Only limited efforts have been made to increase the efficiency of the tax administration, while no action has been taken to link the base for real estate taxation to the market value of the property. Limited progress has been made in tackling long-term unemployment. There has been some progress regarding work-based learning, with a new Act on vocational education and training to enter into force in 2015. However, limited progress has been made in improving the teaching conditions, encouraging the creation of more profession-oriented bachelor programmes, and increasing the participation of Roma in early childhood education and care. No measures have been taken to ensure a wider participation of Roma in vocational training and higher education. Only limited progress has been made in addressing the gaps in the Slovak research and innovation system, namely to improve the quality and relevance of the science base and cooperation between academia, research and business. Some progress has been made in developing energy interconnections with neighbouring countries; in particular, the gas reverse flow with Ukraine has been operational since September 2014. Progress in improving the functioning of the energy market, however, is slow. Measures taken to improve the quality and efficiency of the public administration and the justice system have been limited. The staff working document also discusses the policy challenges stemming from this analysis: . The high unemployment rate hampers Slovakia's growth potential. The main challenges remain insufficient capacity of public employment services to provide personalised services and low internal labour mobility. At the same time, improving access to childcare, in particular for children below three, could increase the labour force participation of women. The school-to-work transition remains difficult for vocational education and training and higher education graduates. Low investments underminesSlovakia's competitiveness and growth prospects. Continuing economic convergence will require significant increases in both physical and human capital. Regional disparities in economic development are caused also  by lacking  infrastructure in Slovakia's eastern regions.  The quality of the business environment hampers Slovakia's attractiveness for both foreign and domestic investment.    . Slovakia's competitiveness depends on the efficiency of its public administration and on the quality of the environment in which businesses operate.  Weaknesses in public administration and ineffective public procurement affect the sound and efficient allocation of public resources. Efforts to tackle corruption have so far remained limited. . Changes to taxation, the pension and healthcare systems have contributed to a better state of public finances. Still, inefficiencies remain in tax collection and administration.  There has been no shift in the tax burden to areas such as real estate or environmental taxation that are less detrimental to growth. Long-term sustainability of public finances depends on increasing the cost-effectiveness of the healthcare sector.   