EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 



Slovakia's positive economic developments offer 
a chance to tackle remaining structural 
challenges and raise its growth potential. (1) 
Addressing long-standing weaknesses in the areas 
of labour market inclusion, education, healthcare, 
public administration and corruption could prove a 
transformative step in utilising Slovakia's 
productive potential and public funds in the best 
possible way. Concerted policy efforts may also 
shield the economy from a potential slowdown and 
support the diversification of the economy, 
allowing it to move up the value chain. 

(1) This report assesses Slovakia’s economy in the light of the 
European Commission’s Annual Growth Survey published 
on 22 November 2017. In the survey, the Commission calls 
on EU Member States to implement reforms to make the 
European economy more productive, resilient and 
inclusive. In doing so, Member States should focus their 
efforts on the three elements of the virtuous triangle of 
economic policy - boosting investment, pursuing structural 
reforms and ensuring responsible fiscal policies. 

Slovakia's economic expansion continues at a 
swift pace. According to the latest Commission 
forecast, real GDP is projected to have increased 
by 3.4 % in 2017 due to solid household spending 
growth amidst a strong labour market recovery. 
Investment activity recovered slightly in 2017 
from the low level of the previous year but failed 
to make a sizeable contribution to growth. Real 
GDP growth is expected to reach 4 % in 2018 and 
4.2% in 2019. Accelerating private consumption is 
set to remain the strongest driver of growth for 
both years, buttressed by rising employment and 
robust wage growth. Both private and government 
fixed investment is likely to accelerate markedly in 
2018 and 2019. External demand is also expected 
to act as an increasingly important source of 
economic growth, partly owing to expanding 
production and export facilities in the 
manufacturing sector. 

The labour market witnessed further positive 
developments. The employment rate rose to 
71.2 % (third quarter of 2017) and the 
unemployment rate fell to 8.1 % in 2017. Further 
improvements in the labour market are expected in 
the medium term. However, long-term 
unemployment and limited job opportunities for 
disadvantaged groups, low internal mobility and 
large disparities between the western region 
around Bratislava and the east of the country 
continue to hamper economic development. The 
tightening of the labour market is accompanied by 

shortages of skilled labour in some sectors of the 
economy. Poor educational outcomes and 
inequalities based on socioeconomic background 
are major obstacles for inclusive growth. 

Developments in the wider economy are 
generally favourable. As economic growth is 
expected to remain well above the EU average, 
Slovakia's income convergence process is expected 
to resume. However, some regions have failed to 
attract major investment, which has exacerbated 
regional disparities in many economic and social 
areas. Although consumer price inflation is set to 
increase, sizeable wage increases are expected to 
ensure a rise in real wages and real disposable 
household incomes. Growth in house prices has 
picked up in the context of low interest rates and 
limited housing supply. However, there are no 
signs yet of the housing market being overvalued. 
Fiscal consolidation is set to continue, supported 
by a favourable economic environment. In 2018 
the government deficit is projected to fall to 
around -1 % of GDP and the debt-to-GDP ratio is 
projected to decline to below 50% of GDP. 

Slovakia has made some progress in addressing 
the 2017 country-specific recommendations. 
Some progress has been made in a number of 
policy areas, including on improving the cost-
effectiveness of the healthcare system, improving 
activation measures for disadvantaged groups, 
enhancing employment opportunities for women, 
and adopting and implementing a comprehensive 
plan to lower administrative and regulatory 
barriers for businesses. Only limited progress has 
been made in improving the quality of education, 
increasing the participation of Roma in education, 
improving competition and transparency in public 
procurement, and in improving the effectiveness of 
the justice system. No progress has been achieved 
in stepping up the fight against corruption. 

Regarding the national targets under the Europe 
2020 strategy, Slovakia currently meets, or is on 
track towards meeting, the prospective targets for 
the employment rate, greenhouse gas emissions, 
renewable energy use, energy efficiency and 
reducing the number of people at risk of poverty 
and social exclusion. While a sufficient reduction 
in the early school leaving rate appears to be 
attainable by 2020, the indicator has deteriorated 
recently and continued action is needed to reach 
the targets. The distance to the targets for Research 


and Development (R&D) intensity and tertiary 
education remains significant, but while is 
progressively narrowing in the latter case, 
sustained effort is needed to attain the R&D target 
again. 

Slovakia faces challenges with regard to a 
number of indicators of the Social Scoreboard 
supporting the European Pillar of Social Rights. 
Whilst the high economic growth has translated 
into a significant improvement of employment 
outcomes, challenges in areas such as childcare, 
active labour market policies and social transfers 
are apparent. Large gender disparities in the labour 
market persist. Access to inclusive education and 
social housing is limited. On the positive side, 
income inequality remains very low and poverty 
rates are decreasing. 

Key structural issues analysed in this report, which 
point to particular challenges for Slovakia's 
economy, are the following: 

. Fiscal revenues are increasing and tax 
compliance has improved but a large VAT 
gap persists. In light of persistent issues 
further anti-fraud measures are planned for 
2018. While fiscal incentives promoting R&D 
were increased, property taxation remains a 
weak revenue source. The medium-term 
budgeting framework is weakened by a largely 
cash-based state budget management system. 
Public spending reviews are nevertheless 
proving powerful tools for raising spending 
efficiency and effectiveness. 
. Long-term sustainability challenges stem 
from the pension and healthcare systems 
despite reforms. Automatic increases in the 
pension age will mitigate the impact of adverse 
demographic trends. The cost-effectiveness of 
the healthcare system is improving, but from a 
low level. A public e-health system has been 
introduced after long delays but limitations in 
terms of basic functionalities and user-
friendliness may hinder its use. A pilot project 
for a diagnosis-linked funding system for 
healthcare providers was launched in 2017. 
While action to rationalise hospital care 
continues, plans to create streamlined, 
integrated care centres have not advanced. 
. Structural labour market weaknesses 
persist. In light of consistently high long-term 
unemployment and increasing skill shortages, 
Slovakia has started implementing the action 
plan for the integration of the long-term 
unemployed focusing on personalised services. 
However, the rate of participation in active 
labour market policies is still low and their 
upskilling component remains limited. Low-
skilled workers, the Roma community and 
young people continue to face high levels of 
unemployment, amplified by high regional 
disparities. The gender employment gap 
remains high, with women's employment 
opportunities conflicting with care 
responsibilities. Efforts are being made to 
improve access to childcare through investment 
from EU funds, but quality and affordable care, 
in particular for children under the age of 3, are 
still lacking. Labour market improvements 
contributed to the decrease in the risk of 
poverty or social exclusion but the intensity of 
poverty is relatively high and not addressed 
sufficiently by social inclusion measures. 
Social housing remains underdeveloped and 
eligibility criteria for receiving unemployment 
benefits are strict. 
. Reforms are taking place in the education 
and training systems, but the quality and 
equity of educational outcomes remain of 
significant concern. Despite some 
improvements, low pay for teachers limits the 
attractiveness of the profession. Student 
performance in basic skills is weak and shows 
a high level of inequality, with low 
achievement strongly linked to socioeconomic 
background. Regional disparities are large, 
particularly affecting the Roma community. 
There is also insufficient inclusion of Roma 
children into mainstream education in light of 
their over-representation in special schools, 
with no recent progress visible. Education 
continues to be relatively underfunded at all 
levels and adult participation in life-long 
learning activities is still very low. 
. The overall outlook for public and private 
investment is favourable but barriers to 
investment persist. Rising labour shortages in 
some of Slovakia's key sectors represent a large 
obstacle to raising investment and production 



levels. Corruption, complex administrative 
procedures, fast-changing regulations and the 
poor quality of regulatory bodies weigh on the 
business environment. Concerns over the 
ineffectiveness of the justice system also hold 
back investment. 
. Slovakia's public administration shows a 
mix of progress and continued challenges. 
Steps have been taken to improve the 
insolvency framework and the use of 
regulatory impact assessments. The new Civil 
Service Act is showing its first results thanks to 
the modernisation of public human resource 
management. However, corruption perceptions 
remain high and prosecutions for such offences 
have fallen further. The lack of accountability 
in bodies tasked with fighting corruption and 
only moderately effective whistle-blower 
protection hinder the fight against corruption. 
Public procurement legislation is being 
modernised, but anti-competitive practices 
remain a problem. Courts are managing to deal 
better with their caseload, but concerns persist 
over the independence of the judiciary. 
. Boosting innovation and resource efficiency 
can ease the transition to a knowledge-
based, greener and more diversified 
economy. However, total R&D investment fell 
in 2016 and business R&D intensity remains 
very low. The governing framework for R&D 
policy is weak and measures to improve the 
cooperation between businesses and academia 
are advancing only slowly. The lack of skilled 
workers in the sizeable information and 
communications technology sector is being 
addressed via a 'digital coalition' initiative. 
Meanwhile, the roll-out of e-government 
services is proceeding slowly. The services 
sector is highly regulated and the framework 
does not appear to function effectively. Energy 
efficiency is low and the use of landfills is 
excessive. Recycling rates are very low and air 
quality remains relatively poor. 


 


