In 2014, the Slovenian economy rebounded strongly. After a cumulative decline of more than 9% between 2008 and 2013, real GDP is estimated to have grown by 2.6% in 2014. Growth has been predominantly export-driven but domestic demand has also begun to recover. The recovery in investment expenditure has been driven mainly by infrastructure construction financed through EU funds, while private sector investment remains subdued. Real GDP is expected to grow by 2.1% on average in 2015-16. The unemployment rate remains below the EU average, falling to 9.8% in 2014 and is expected to decline further. Public debt is forecast to stand at 83% of GDP in 2015, gradually increasing in the medium term.  In March 2014, the Commission concluded that Slovenia was continuing to experience excessive macroeconomic imbalances, which required specific monitoring and continued strong policy action. This Country Report assesses Slovenia's economy against the background of the Commission's Annual Growth Survey, which recommends three main pillars for the EU's economic and social policy in 2015: investment, structural reforms, and fiscal responsibility. In line with the Investment Plan for Europe, it also explores ways to maximise the impact of public resources and unlock private investment. Finally, it assesses Slovenia in the light of the findings of the 2015 Alert Mechanism Report, in which the Commission found it useful to examine further the persistence of imbalances or their unwinding. The main findings of the in-depth review contained in this country report are: . The high level of non-performing loans and low credit demand from creditworthy firms may have implications for the viability of the banking sector. Although confidence in the banking sector has returned, credit growth remains negative and the banks' profitability and viability can be further enhanced. Non-performing loans to non-financial corporations are still higher than before the crisis. Continued weakness in the cash flow capacity of the firms constrains lending opportunities and poses further risks to the asset quality and profitability of the banking sector.   . High debt, deleveraging pressures and ongoing restructuring in the corporate sector adversely affect private investment and growth. The corporate sector has been deleveraging since the peak in 2010 but remains undercapitalised, which affects the sector's investment capacity. Low investment has implications on productivity and competiveness of the companies, their ability to innovate and also erodes Slovenia's potential growth. . A high level of state involvement combined with weak corporate governance distorts resource allocation, and hampers investment and growth. The state is the largest employer, asset manager and corporate debtor in Slovenia. The state involvement in the economy has had significant fiscal and economic implications for Slovenia since the onset of the crisis. State-owned entities have underperformed compared to their privately owned peers in terms of productivity and profitability at both national and regional level.   . External competitiveness and external sustainability have improved considerably and risks appear to have subsided. Wage restraint since 2011 together with increased productivity and gains in non-cost competitiveness have helped to improve significantly Slovenia’s external performance and position in terms of flows and stocks.  . The large increase in public debt in recent years creates additional challenges. A prolonged recession coupled with significant bank recapitalisations has resulted in a sharp rise in public debt. Fiscal consolidation measures in recent years, particularly on the expenditure side, have been of a temporary nature and reform of the fiscal framework is lagging behind. Furthermore, the ageing population puts pressure on the sustainability of the pension and long-term care systems. . Labour market reform has addressed segmentation and introduced greater flexibility. The labour market situation is showing signs of improvement but structural problems persist as regards to long-term unemployment and the low employment rates of low-skilled and older workers. . An improved business environment will assist in attracting productive investment, including foreign direct investment. The business environment is hindered by high government involvement and regulation, which poses obstacles to the inflow of productive investment. The latter is important as a source of fresh equity and funding, technology transfer, infrastructure and trade development. . There is a renewed commitment to fight corruption and increase the effectiveness of public administration and the judiciary. The government adopted a fresh two-year programme in January 2015, while the strategy for public administration is expected to be adopted in February 2015. The focus is now on prioritisation and implementation. Overall, Slovenia has made some progress in addressing the 2014 country-specific recommendations. Policy measures to stabilise the banking sector have been implemented. The Bank Asset Management Company is now fully operational. The restructuring of four major state-owned banks and the wind-down of two smaller domestic banks are on track. A corporate restructuring master plan and a centralised task force were established. A new corporate governance code for state-owned enterprises was adopted. The Slovenian Sovereign Holding, responsible for the management and divestment of state assets, is now fully operational. A draft asset management strategy is yet to be approved by the Slovenian Parliament, and will be followed by the release of the divestment schedule for a number of well-targeted state assets. The privatisation programme is progressing, albeit with delays. The sale process for the two largest assets is expected to be signed by April 2015. This country report highlights the policy challenges stemming from the analysis of macro-economic imbalances, namely: . Boosting long-term profitability and reducing non-performing loans in the corporate sector will make for a healthier banking sector. There is scope for further consolidation of the banking sector, which could be facilitated through the continuation of the privatisation process. . Further deleveraging of the corporate sector would help restore the conditions for a rebound of private investment. The swift restructuring of the corporate sector through the application of existing tools, including the Bank Asset Management Company and the new insolvency legislation, will boost the recovery of cash-flows in the corporate sector. Attracting fresh equity investment from abroad can help reduce the high debt leverage and restore creditworthiness, an important prerequisite for resolving non-performing loans and improving banks’ profitability. . Further disentangling the complex network of state-owned enterprises would help mitigate future risks to public finances. Slovenia could take advantage from the current positive market momentum to divest selected state-owned enterprises. This would assist in attracting foreign direct investment and improving the economic outlook. Sound management and enhanced corporate governance policies for state-owned assets can help mitigate the risks of future state support. . The right fiscal framework coupled with comprehensive expenditure reviews can help to enhance the sustainability of public finances. In particular, they help shift the focus of budgetary execution from temporary measures and linear across-the-board cuts to expenditure rationalisation and efficiency savings. The comprehensive review of expenditure in the health sector can provide a useful blueprint for future reviews in other key policy areas such as education. While one-off spending reviews can have a major impact, the maximum benefits are obtained when they become a regular part of the budget process. . Attracting foreign direct investment will be essential in ensuring a sustainable recovery. The new government has set an ambitious target of reaching the EU average stock of foreign direct investment by 2017. The forthcoming strategy could include a coherent set of both facilitation and promotion measures, including substantially reducing the administrative burden on both local and foreign companies. 