EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 



Spain's continuing strong recovery is an 
opportunity to reinvigorate the reform 
momentum and complete earlier achievements. 
Economic activity and employment grew again 
strongly and imbalances further unwound in 2017. 
However, productivity is increasing slowly due to 
low innovation capacity and investment in 
knowledge and skills; and strong labour market 
segmentation and uneven social policy outcomes 
risk entrenching high income inequality. 
Addressing those challenges and ensuring full 
implementation of initiated reforms ó such as in 
product markets regulation ó could reduce the 
risk of a slowdown should the external economic 
environment and financial conditions become less 
supportive (1). 

(1) This report assesses Spainís economy in the light of the 
European Commissionís Annual Growth Survey published 
on 22 November 2017. In the survey, the Commission calls 
on EU Member States to implement reforms to make the 
European economy more productive, resilient and 
inclusive. In so doing, Member States should focus their 
efforts on the three elements of the virtuous triangle of 
economic policy - boosting investment, pursuing structural 
reforms and ensuring responsible fiscal policies. At the 
same time, the Commission published the Alert 
Mechanism Report (AMR) that initiated the seventh round 
of the macroeconomic imbalance procedure. The AMR 
found that Spain warranted an in-depth review, which is 
presented in this report. 

The Spanish economy continued to grow above 
expectations and the euro area average in 2017. 
In its fourth year of expansion, Spanish real GDP 
surpassed its 2008 pre-crisis peak. Economic 
growth was driven by domestic demand, in 
particular private consumption, supported by high 
job creation. Investment, especially in equipment, 
also grew robustly. Exports consolidated their 
positive contribution to growth, supported by an 
increasing internationalization of Spanish firms 
and further cost-competitiveness gains. Overall, 
the growth of economic activity continued on a 
more balanced pattern than before the crisis. 

Growth is expected to decelerate but remain 
robust. Ambitious structural reforms in the 
aftermath of the crisis set the foundations for the 
strong recovery. However, other supporting factors 
- namely low oil prices and the stimulus from tax 
cuts and improving financing conditions - are set 
to gradually subside. Private consumption is 
therefore set to moderate but remain a robust 
driver of growth. Investment growth is forecast to 
ease only slightly. 

The economic rebalancing progressed further, 
but high debt levels and unemployment still 
represent vulnerabilities. External debt is still 
very high, despite the continued reduction driven 
by a sustained current account surplus. Private 
sector debt reduction also progressed, only slowed 
down by new credit finally starting to grow again. 
The public debt ratio has so far declined slowly, 
leaving sustainability risks elevated in the medium 
term. Unemployment has continued its rapid 
decline, but remains among the highest in the EU. 

Spain represents a source of potential 
spill-overs to the rest of the euro area. 
Simulations show that a decisive implementation 
of product market reforms in Spain would have a 
limited but positive impact on the growth of other 
euro area countries. 

Spain has made overall limited progress in 
addressing the 2017 country-specific 
recommendations (CSRs). Spain made some 
progress in reforming public procurement, limited 
progress in strengthening the fiscal framework, 
and some progress in undertaking a comprehensive 
spending review. Some progress was achieved in 
reinforcing coordination between public 
employment services and social services. There 
was limited progress in promoting hiring on open-
ended contracts, addressing disparities in income 
guarantee schemes and improving family support, 
as well as in increasing the labour market 
relevance of tertiary education and addressing 
regional disparities in educational outcomes. 
Finally, Spain made limited progress on the 
implementation of the law on market unity and on 
research and innovation investment and 
governance, although there was some 
improvement in the latter area. 

Regarding progress in reaching the national 
targets under the Europe 2020 strategy, Spain 
is performing well in reducing greenhouse gas 
emissions and on track to achieve its renewable 
energy and energy efficiency targets. The 
tertiary education rate is close to the target. While 
sizeable gaps remain concerning the employment 
rate and early school leaving, they were again 
substantially reduced. By contrast, there was little 
progress towards the targets for R&D investment 
and reducing poverty risk. 


Spain faces challenges with regard to a number 
of indicators of the Social Scoreboard 
supporting the European Pillar of Social Rights. 
As past efforts to promote employment creation 
are bearing fruit, the creation of permanent 
employment is slowly increasing in prevalence, 
but the use of temporary contracts remains 
widespread. Income inequality stabilised but it 
remains relatively high. Early school leaving keeps 
improving but, together with a high risk of poverty 
among children, weighs on equality of 
opportunities. The shares of people at risk of 
poverty and social exclusion and of young people 
not in employment, education and training are 
decreasing but call for close monitoring. The 
impact of social transfers (other than pensions) on 
poverty reduction is weak. 

The main findings of the in-depth review 
contained in this report and the related policy 
challenges are as follows: 

. Spain does not face immediate risks of 
fiscal stress, but medium-term 
sustainability risks remain high. The general 
government debt ratio is still high. Its 
reduction is projected to slightly accelerate in 
2018-2019, also supported by strong nominal 
GDP growth, but the debt ratio is expected to 
remain around 95 % of GDP in the medium 
term. Projected savings in age-related 
expenditure attenuate fiscal sustainability 
risks. The efficiency of some spending items 
may benefit from the recently initiated 
spending review and the implementation of a 
new public procurement law. 
. Private debt reduction has continued, but 
certain groups of firms and households 
remain highly indebted. Private debt both of 
companies and households has fallen further 
overall. Nominal GDP growth is increasingly 
driving the debt ratio reduction, allowing 
credit flows to households and firms, 
especially SMEs, to pick up in 2017. The still 
high level of indebtedness of some households 
and non-financial corporations, in particular 
low-income and jobless households and 
companies in the construction and the real 
estate sector, reduces their ability to weather 
potential shocks. 
. Structural improvements in trade 
performance underpin the slow reduction 
of Spain's external liabilities. Exports' 
increasing geographical diversification and a 
rising number of regularly exporting 
companies have led to gains in export market 
shares, indicating a structural shift in Spain's 
export performance. Furthermore, the 
economy's increased reliance on domestically 
produced goods has restrained import growth. 
As a result, in 2017, the current account 
registered a surplus for the fifth consecutive 
year. Current account surpluses will need to 
be sustained for an extended period of time to 
decisively bring down the still very high 
external liabilities. 
. Employment continued to grow at a robust 
pace and unemployment further fell 
rapidly, but is still very high. The strength of 
the labour market recovery is partly due to the 
impact of the past reforms and wage 
moderation. Both helped to increase the 
responsiveness of employment to economic 
growth. However, the unemployment rate 
remains among the highest in the EU. This is 
especially true for young people, implying a 
considerable untapped skills potential. Almost 
half of the unemployed have been jobless for 
more than a year. Spain is stepping up 
activation policies targeting the long-term 
unemployed, young people, and older 
workers. Nevertheless, their effectiveness 
largely depends on regional public 
employment services' capacity and 
coordination with employers and social 
services, which is only slowly improving. 
. Productivity has grown in some sectors, but 
weak innovation and investment entrenches 
the productivity gap between the best and 
worst performers. Since the recovery started, 
productivity has grown more in the tradable 
than non-tradable sectors, both in 
manufacturing and services. In some tradable 
sectors ó where Spain has some competitive 
advantage ó productivity growth compares 
favourably with other large euro area 
countries. Still, the productivity performance 
across firms within sectors is very 
heterogeneous, which can be partly explained 
by weaknesses in innovation capacity and, to a 



lesser extent, investment in knowledge-based 
capital. 


Other key structural issues analysed in this report, 
which point to particular challenges for Spain's 
economy, are the following: 

. Spanish banks continued their stabilisation, 
while access to finance improved. The 
banking system as a whole comfortably meets 
the regulatory capital requirements and non-
performing loans have been further reduced. 
The successful resolution of one bank in June 
2017 contributed to strengthening the stability 
of the financial sector. Policies to support 
equity funding are proving effective. 
. The widespread use of temporary contracts 
negatively affects productivity growth and 
income inequality. While permanent 
contracts are on the rise amongst newly 
employed workers, the share of employees on 
temporary contracts is still high. Young and 
low-skilled workers are most affected by 
temporary employment, which often fails to 
lead to a permanent job. This outlook reduces 
incentives for workers and employers to invest 
in training and lifelong education, thus 
eroding human capital formation, which in 
turn impedes faster productivity growth. 
Moreover, temporary workers are at a higher 
risk of poverty and tend to accumulate lower 
entitlements to social benefits. Spain is 
fighting the abuse of temporary contracts with 
growing success and plans to increase the 
share of permanent posts in the public 
administration. However, incentives to 
promote open-ended contracts in the private 
sector have so far had only small effects. 
. Skills mismatches and gaps in educational 
outcomes also weigh on productivity 
growth. Tertiary graduates face difficulties in 
finding adequate jobs, and both over- and 
under-qualification are widespread in Spain. 
Though decreasing, the early school leaving 
rate remains amongst the highest in the EU 
and educational outcomes continue to vary 
considerably across regions. A high share of 
teachers is recruited on temporary contracts. 
The teaching and acquisition of digital skills is 
a challenge, which recent initiatives have 
started to address. 
. The social situation continued to improve 
with economic and job growth, but income 
inequality and the share of population at 
risk of poverty remain high. The 
employment situation of household members 
plays an important role in this context. In 
2016, the share of people at risk of poverty 
and social exclusion again decreased slightly, 
but remains high especially for jobless and 
single-earner households, as well as for 
children. In addition, family policies and 
social benefits, notably income guarantee 
schemes, suffer from uneven coverage and 
low effectiveness. High levels of income 
inequality, early school leaving and child 
poverty may negatively affect the equality of 
opportunities. 
. While public procurement and the fight 
against corruption saw progress, advances 
to improve the business environment have 
slowed down. The law on market unity, 
subject of several rulings by the Constitutional 
Court in 2017, is still to be fully implemented. 
Regulatory disparities and restrictions keep 
mark-ups high, geographical mobility of 
companies and workers low, and productivity 
growth restrained. By contrast, a new law on 
public procurement, if implemented well, is 
likely to improve the efficiency and 
transparency of public procurement. The 
justice system's efficiency is being increased 
and the implementation of anti-corruption 
laws is making the business environment more 
attractive. The perception of the justice 
system's independence has improved. 
. The innovation performance remains weak, 
despite governance improvements. Public 
and private investment in R&D remains 
subdued. Low capacity of small and medium 
enterprises to adopt innovations and take 
advantage of digitisation is a drag on Spain's 
longer-term productivity growth. Governance 
of research and innovation has been 
streamlined and made more inclusive, but 
coordination between government levels is 
still uneven and the lack of systematic 
evaluations prevents policy learning. 



