EXECUTIVE SUMMARY The recent overall economic and financial developments confirm the stabilisation that has been unfolding over the last two years in Spain. In 2014 and early 2015, economic growth in Spain was supported  by rapid employment creation, easier financing conditions, improved confidence, and lower energy and oil prices. These factors are expected to continue to support growth in the short to medium term, despite high private and public debt levels continuing to exert a drag on growth. Financial markets have stabilised, but the country remains vulnerable to sudden changes in global investor sentiment. Labour market conditions are improving, but unemployment remains very high. Social indicators are continuing to deteriorate, although the positive evolution of labour markets may bring some improvement over the next years. Moreover, negative inflation in 2014 provided some relief in real gross disposable income for households in a context of continued wage moderation. Housing prices seem to be close to bottoming out.  In March 2014, the Commission concluded that Spain was experiencing macroeconomic imbalances that require specific monitoring and decisive policy action. In several dimensions, adjustment of the identified imbalances has advanced, and the return to growth has reduced risks. Nevertheless, the nature, magnitude and interrelations between the imbalances, in particular private and public sector indebtedness, the negative net international investment position and the various policy challenges in the labour market still expose Spain to risks. This Country Report assesses Spain's economy against the background of the Commission's Annual Growth Survey which recommends three main pillars for the EU's economic and social policy in 2015: investment, structural reforms, and fiscal responsibility. In line with the Investment Plan for Europe, it also explores ways to maximise the impact of public resources and unlock private investment. Finally, it assesses Spain in the light of the findings of the 2015 Alert Mechanism Report, in which the Commission found it useful to further examine the persistence of imbalances or their unwinding. The main findings related to macroeconomic imbalances contained in this country report are: ¥ Despite a positive development in recent years, the current account surplus narrowed significantly in 2014. This is caused by the slowdown in the main Spanish export markets and the rebound of imports linked to robust domestic demand. Spain's external sector performance is also affected by the high import content of exports, Spain's energy dependence, the relatively smaller size of Spanish firms, and the high sensitivity of exports to changes in relative prices and costs.  ¥ The large stock of external liabilities has kept increasing, making Spain vulnerable to adverse shocks or shifts in market's confidence. The overall high stock of private and public debt, both domestic and external, poses risks for growth and financial stability. The recovery of private sector balance sheets is advancing, backed by credit contraction. ¥ Job creation has gathered pace, but unemployment remains very high. Youth joblessness is very high, and long-term unemployment risks becoming structural, and leading to labour and social exclusion. Labour market segmentation remains a challenge. ¥ Negative macroeconomic developments in Spain would have a significant impact on other euro area countries. Structural reforms in Spain can contribute to supporting activity in the euro area. ¥ Boosting private and public investment would help Spain further increase productivity growth and improve competitiveness. Further investment to increase security of supply and stimulate competition in energy markets remains a priority. Spain's research and innovation performance still suffers from i.a., inadequate funding and governance. ¥ While the 2014 reform of the personal and corporate income tax simplifies the tax system, its impact on the achievement of budgetary targets is still unclear.  ¥ Despite progress made, starting-up and operating a business in Spain remains relatively cumbersome, a fact that could slow the number of new firms. A competition-enhancing reform in professional services has been on the agenda for long to intensify business dynamics and contribute to lower consumer prices. A fragmented corporate structure of the Spanish economy exacerbates cyclical problems with bank financing. ¥ Early school leaving is decreasing, but remains very high. Combined with relatively low basic skills', this can limit Spain's growth potential.  ¥ The ongoing reform of public administration can contribute to efficiency gains and fiscal savings. Enhancing the efficiency of the judicial system is also an important lever to improve Spain's business environment. ¥ The recent reforms of the electricity and gas sectors will possibly reduce the tariff deficits from 2014 onwards. But the effectiveness of measures to limit potential liabilities for public finances stemming from transport infrastructure is still uncertain. This Country Report also assesses progress towards implementing the 2014 Country Specific Recommendations. It concludes that on average, Spain has made some progress in implementing them.  Most significant progress has been recorded on the operationalization of the new independent fiscal authority on easing the establishment of large-scale retail premises and on the reform of the public administration. Spain made some progress in the implementation of the recommendation on tax reform, improving the cost-effectiveness of the healthcare sector, conducting a spending review, completing the reform of the savings banks, widening SMEs' access to finance, removing the remaining bottlenecks in the corporate insolvency framework, enhancing the effectiveness of active labour market policies and promoting labour mobility, applying the education reform, putting in place the national Youth Guarantee system, increase transparency of administrative decisions, implementing the law on market unity, facilitating business licensing and eliminating the deficit in the electricity system.  Only limited progress is recorded on the recommendations on social issues, combatting labour market segmentation, strengthening public employment services, implementing the new national strategy for science, technology and innovation, enhancing cooperation between higher education and employers and adopting pending judicial reforms. Lastly, there has been no progress on the implementation of the recommendation on professional services, on creating a state research agency and on increasing control mechanisms at sub-central government level. The Country Report discusses the policy challenges stemming from the analysis of macro.economic imbalances:  ¥ Re-orientation of the economy towards exporting sectors and competitiveness. recovery is a necessary condition for reducing the large stock of external liabilities. Removing obstacles to firm growth, supporting SMEs to expand their markets and enhancing innovation appear key to boosting export capacity, job creation, compete more efficiently also in internal markets and enhancing overall productivity. ¥ Ongoing deleveraging pressures continue to impact economic growth. The adjustment of private sector balance-sheets is advancing, but the deleveraging of households is taking place at a slower pace. ¥ While the public deficit remains on a declining path, without further consolidation efforts in the medium term Spain would not bring down the general government debt. ¥ High long-term unemployment and high segmentation continue to hamper productivity growth and working conditions. Without adequate targeting and implementation of active labour market and activation policies, including re-skilling towards sectors with job.creation perspectives, addressing the unemployment problem remains a challenge. ¥ Other policy challenges that Spain faces include consistent implementation of reforms at regional level, creation of conditions for an innovation-friendly business environment, improvements in business licensing, reform of professional services, completion of measures on insolvency; reinforcement of links between education and the labour market and strengthening of public employment services, and improvements in water and waste management. 