EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 



Sweden's buoyant economic performance 
represents an excellent foundation to address 
structural weaknesses in relation to the housing 
market and household debt. Further boosting 
new construction in appropriate locations and 
market segments could help alleviate a long-
standing housing shortage. A more market-
oriented rental housing sector could contribute to 
this as well, and would also support mobility and 
flexibility in the labour market. Tax incentives for 
property ownership and mortgage debt still support 
household debt growth and overvalued house 
prices. Addressing these issues would make the 
Swedish economy more resilient. (1) 

(1) This report assesses Swedenís economy in the light of the 
European Commissionís Annual Growth Survey published 
on 22 November 2017. In the survey, the Commission calls 
on EU Member States to implement reforms to make the 
European economy more productive, resilient and 
inclusive. In so doing, Member States should focus their 
efforts on the three elements of the virtuous triangle of 
economic policy ó boosting investment, pursuing 
structural reforms and ensuring responsible fiscal policies. 
At the same time, the Commission published the Alert 
Mechanism Report (AMR) that initiated the seventh round 
of the macroeconomic imbalance procedure. The AMR 
found that Sweden warranted an in-depth review, which is 
presented in this report. 

After recording an estimated 2.7 % growth in 
2017, the Commissionís winter 2018 interim 
forecast projects real GDP to increase by 2.7 % 
and 2.0 % in 2018 and 2019, respectively. Robust 
export growth and a moderate increase in domestic 
demand are expected to support economic activity 
in the coming years. 

Swedenís external position remains strong. 
Goods and services exports benefitted from the 
global upswing in 2017. As import growth 
remained solid, the current account surplus 
hovered around 5 % in 2016-2017. Underpinned 
by strong growth in Sweden's main trading 
partners, the outlook for exports will remain 
favourable, in particular for investment goods. 

Investment surged due to buoyant construction 
activity. After expanding at a rate of above 5 % 
per year in 2015-2017, investment is expected to 
continue increasing at a slower pace in the coming 
years. Partly thanks to reforms to building 
regulations and the planning process, investment in 
housing in particular has rebounded strongly since 
mid-2013. However, this new supply is insufficient 
to match estimated housing needs. 

The labour market continues to perform well. 
In 2016 Sweden had one of the highest 
employment rates in the EU at 81.2 %, and overall 
unemployment was below the EU average at 
6.9 %. Labour shortages emerged in sectors such 
as construction, education, health, science, 
engineering and ICT. A major challenge for the 
labour market now is the integration of people with 
a migrant background, including those with 
relatively low levels of education and skills. 

The fiscal position has remained strong. Robust 
revenue collection and lower-than-expected 
expenditure for migration and integration should 
result in a fiscal surplus in 2018 and 2019. 
Government debt stood at about 39 % of GDP in 
2017, well below the reference value of 60 % of 
GDP agreed in the Treaty, and is projected to 
decline in coming years. The outlook for Swedenís 
fiscal sustainability is sound in the short, medium 
and long term. 

Inflation is expected to stay broadly stable. 
Swedenís central bank has continued its 
expansionary monetary policy to support a 
sustainable rise in the rate of inflation to its 2 % 
target. It has kept repo rates at negative levels. 

Financial conditions support the economy, but 
also contribute to imbalances. The central bankís 
monetary policy stance has resulted in very low 
mortgage interest rates. In turn, low rates have 
further boosted private indebtedness and to a lesser 
extent supported house prices. 

Sweden has made limited (2) progress in 
addressing the 2017 country-specific 
recommendation. As regards policies relevant to 
macroeconomic imbalances, the government 
approved a strengthened amortisation 
requirement (3) for high-debt-to-income 
mortgages; thus achieving substantial progress in 
this area. Some progress has been made on 
fostering investment in housing and improving the 
efficiency of the housing market. In particular, the 
authorities are continuing to gradually implement 
the 22-point plan to increase residential 
construction and improve the efficiency of the 

(2) Information on the level of progress and actions taken to 
address the policy advice in each respective subpart of a 
CSR is presented in the Overview Table in the Annex. 

(3) Amortisation here refers to capital repayments on mortgage 
loans (see Section 4.2.3). 


housing market. The government has also 
launched a new initiative for more participation by 
foreign firms in the Swedish construction sector. 
No significant policy action has been taken to 
introduce more flexibility in setting rental prices. 
Finally, there are key parts of the recommendation 
that have not been met by any policy action, 
notably on reforming the favourable tax treatment 
of mortgage debt and home ownership. On these 
aspects of the recommendation, no progress has 
been made. 

Regarding progress in reaching the national targets 
under the Europe 2020 strategy, indicators where 
Sweden continues to perform well are the 
employment rate, greenhouse gas emissions, the 
share of renewable energy, the rate of early school 
leaving, tertiary education attainment and poverty 
risks. Areas where progress remains relatively 
weak are energy efficiency and R&D targets. 

Sweden performs well on the indicators of the 
Social Scoreboard supporting the European 
Pillar of Social Rights. The employment rate is 
high, while the gender employment gap and the 
share of young people not in employment, edu-
cation or training rate are at low levels. Positive 
outcomes, also on participation in active labour 
market policies and of children in formal childcare, 
reflect an advanced welfare model, strong social 
dialogue and a high level of gender equality. 

The main findings of the in-depth review 
contained in this report and the related policy 
challenges are as follows: 

. While banks are healthy, there are 
vulnerabilities linked to their growing 
exposure to household mortgages. Banks 
remain profitable. The regulatory capital 
adequacy ratios are high, but as a share of total 
(unweighted) assets, capital has remained 
stable at lower levels. Considering the steadily 
increasing mortgage-related lending on their 
balance sheets, the risk of a rapid decline in 
house prices represents a significant 
vulnerability for the stability of the banking 
system. Moreover, since Swedish banking 
groups are of systemic importance for all 
countries in the Nordic-Baltic financial market, 
any shock to the banking sector could have a 
wider impact on neighbouring countries. 
. Household indebtedness has continued to 
rise from already elevated levels. Household 
debt grew by 7.0 % in 2017, reaching about 
86 % of GDP and 184 % of disposable income 
ñ among the highest levels in the EU. This is 
driven mainly by higher mortgage borrowing, 
linked to high house prices and rising new 
construction volumes, coupled with structural 
distortions favouring mortgage-financed 
property investment. Debt levels are unevenly 
distributed, with lower-income and younger 
households facing particularly high debt loads 
relative to their incomes. Sweden has 
implemented several macroprudential measures 
in recent years, including a mortgage 
amortisation requirement in 2016. The latter 
appears to have considerably influenced 
borrower behaviour, but the overall effect on 
total debt incurred seems modest. More 
generally, macroprudential policy steps taken 
so far appear to have had limited impact on 
mortgage lending growth. 
. After two decades of rapidly rising house 
prices, the housing market experienced a 
gradual decline in autumn 2017, before 
rising somewhat again in January 2018, but 
prices remain above fundamentals. Key 
structural issues include tax incentives 
favouring home ownership and mortgage debt, 
and continued accommodative credit 
conditions coupled with still relatively low 
mortgage amortisation rates. In addition, 
despite a sharp rise in new construction in 
recent years, there is still an ongoing supply 
shortage, particularly of affordable homes 
around major cities. This shortage in housing 
supply is linked to structural inefficiencies, 
including limited competition in the 
construction sector due to barriers to entry for 
small and foreign firms and the ability of large 
developers to control land resources. There are 
also barriers to efficient usage of the existing 
housing stock. In the rental market, below-
market rents create lock-in and 
ëinsider/outsiderí effects. In the owner-
occupancy market, capital gains taxes reduce 
homeowner mobility. The housing shortage 
also hampers labour mobility and can 
contribute to intergenerational inequality. 



. The continued increase in household debt 
and bank exposure to residential mortgages 
is a growing risk to macroeconomic stability. 
Despite gradual policy action, mortgage debt 
continues to increase further. With the housing 
market still appearing overvalued, even after 
recent declines, rising indebtedness means 
there is the growing risk of a disorderly 
correction. This could culminate in a rapid 
deleveraging process, with an adverse impact 
on the real economy and potentially the 
banking sector. 


Other key structural issues analysed in this country 
report, which point to particular challenges for 
Sweden's economy, are the following: 

. Despite favourable economic conditions, 
some population groups have difficulties 
finding a job. Sweden has high employment 
and low long-term unemployment rates. 
However, challenges remain, for example 
integrating low-skilled people and non-EU 
migrants into the labour market. This challenge 
is likely to remain in the coming years in light 
of the magnitude and composition of the arrival 
of asylum seekers in late 2015. Efforts have 
been made to improve the employability of 
recently arrived migrants and a new simplified 
scheme (introduktionsjobb) is set to begin in 
spring 2018. 
. The educational performance gap between 
different social groups is large and widening. 
Despite recent measures, the education system 
does not appear to promote quality education 
for all. The integration of newly arrived 
migrant pupils warrants close monitoring, as 
does the growing shortage of teachers. 
. The economy benefits from a favourable 
business environment, although barriers to 
investment and long-term growth remain. 
Sweden performs well in terms of efficient 
public administration, access to finance for 
small and medium-sized enterprises, and 
innovation and internationalisation by busi-
nesses. The public procurement system 
generally works well, but investment by small 
and medium-sized enterprises is in some cases 
constrained by insufficiently transparent public 
procurement procedures. Finally, there remains 
scope for closer cooperation between academia 
and businesses. 


 


