EXECUTIVE SUMMARY In 2014 and early 2015, GDP and employment growth in Sweden were supported by expanding domestic demand relying on robust consumption and an expanding construction sector, while Sweden’s export sector is struggling. As external demand gradually improves, investment and stronger exports will help Sweden's GDP growth to rise from 1.8% in 2014 to 2.3% in 2015.  Household consumption grew dynamically supported by low interest rates, growing disposable incomes and an expansionary fiscal policy in recent years. Government consumption expands due to higher spending on integration of migrants, education and elderly care.  Sweden's level of investment is high compared to its peer countries. Further investments in research and development and education could help to reverse the declining R&D investment trend and to boost the long-term competitiveness of the country. Investments in transport infrastructure to improve connectivity within and between urban areas could help to alleviate some of the constraints caused by the housing shortage. Employment recovered more quickly in Sweden than in other EU Member States after the financial crisis. The employment rate of 79.8% is already close to pre-crisis levels and is the highest among EU Member States. Nevertheless, due to the dynamically rising labour force, unemployment has been stuck around 8% for several years and is particularly high among low-educated young people. The employment gap between those born in Sweden and non-EU migrants also remains large, especially for women.  This Country Report assesses Sweden's economy against the background of the Commission's Annual Growth Survey which recommends three main pillars for the EU's economic and social policy in 2015: investment, structural reforms, and fiscal responsibility. In line with the Investment Plan for Europe, it also explores ways to maximise the impact of public resources and unlock private investment. Finally, it assesses Sweden in the light of the findings of the 2015 Alert Mechanism Report, in which the Commission found it useful to examine further the persistence of imbalances or their unwinding. The main findings of the In-Depth Review contained in this Country Report are: • The high level of household indebtedness in Sweden has been identified as a remaining risk for macroeconomic stability. Household debt, notably in the form of mortgages, remains at very high levels (roughly 160% of disposable income on average in 2013) and keeps expanding, with net credit flows outpacing nominal GDP growth. The challenge is particularly pronounced in metropolitan municipalities and in general negatively affects the ability of the real economy to withstand shocks.  • Unlike in many other EU Member States, house prices have not gone through any major correction in Sweden. On the contrary, they keep increasing, partly due to favourable fundamentals such as higher disposable income, low interest rates, strong demographics etc. Structural issues also contribute to house price growth in Sweden: the housing market is characterised by several market inefficiencies and weak competition. As a result, construction activity has been weak for many years, which has resulted in a housing shortage. Supply is further held back by an ineffective use of the existing housing stock due to rigidities on the rental market. However, the above-mentioned factors cannot alone explain the extent of price increases, which suggests that levels might be above their fundamental value. The Country Report also analyses macroeconomic and structural issues and the main findings are: • In the short and medium term, Sweden faces no major risks in terms of fiscal sustainability. Nevertheless, the budgetary impact of population ageing, in particular in the area of long-term care, is a risk element in terms of long-term fiscal sustainability. Swedish taxation is the fourth highest in the EU with a tax-to-GDP ratio (including social contributions) of 44.2% in 2012. • The Swedish labour market, to a large extent governed by negotiations between social partners at sectorial level, is characterised by positive labour market outcomes, for instance, in terms of high employment rate. However, low-educated and low-skilled young people and non-EU nationals Executive summary face high unemployment, inter alia in the  carefully sequenced implementation,  context of an overall deterioration of education  minimising potential unease on the housing.  outcomes.   •  Housing market developments are  • School education results in Sweden have  intimately linked to structural inefficiencies.  weakened (for instance Sweden is now  Further efforts to streamline and simplify  performing below both the EU and OECD  planning and building regulations, support  averages according to PISA surveys) and  public infrastructure investments and promote  equity in education has been declining. The  better competition in the construction sector  system of integrating newly arrived migrant  could help increase new constructions.  pupils shows a number of shortcomings.  Reforming the rent setting procedure in order  to allow wider divergence of rent levels could  Overall, Sweden has made limited progress in  lead to a more effective use of the existing  addressing the 2014 country-specific  housing stock. Due to the municipalities'  recommendations.  pivotal part in new constructions, any policy  actions should also consider their role and  As regards policies relevant to macroeconomic  revise their incentives to support new  imbalances, steps have been taken to improve  construction. Addressing the supply side  the efficiency of the housing market and to stem  constraints could smoothen house price  household indebtedness, such as an increase in  dynamics and ease economic and social  the risk weight floor on mortgages and the  constraints.  forthcoming compulsory amortisation on new  mortgage loans. However, no action has been  Other challenges are:  taken to reduce tax deductibility of mortgage  interest or to reform the rental market. Some  •  Developing the human capital of the low. elements of the macroeconomic imbalance  skilled could contribute to higher  relevant recommendations have thus remained  employment of vulnerable groups and  unaddressed and overall, limited progress was  positively contribute to higher competitiveness.  made in implementing them.  Ensuring that employment subsidies are  adequately targeted is also important.   As regards the recommendations to address  other policy challenges, while this Country  •  Municipalities' strengthened responsibility  Report excludes an assessment of compliance  for young people who are neither in  with the Stability and Growth Pact, it can be  employment, education or training, paves  noted that the Swedish government has a  the way for additional improvements in  continued commitment to fiscal responsibility.  outreach. A better developed partnership  Some progress has also been made to address  between the public employment service and  challenges linked to the Swedish labour market, in  various services and actors at the local level  particular regarding widening the use of work- will be a key success factor.  based learning and apprenticeships, and fully  implementing the youth guarantee.  •  Deteriorating school education outcomes  risk putting pressure on Sweden's  The Country Report reveals the policy challenges  competitiveness and innovation capacity in  stemming from the analysis of macroeconomic  the long run. The quality of education resting  imbalances:  on multiple pillars, a well-rounded and  comprehensive approach appears important.  • The debt-bias in taxation still gives Swedish  households incentives to take on debt. More  specifically, mortgage interest deductibility and  recurrent property taxation can be important  drivers in this context. Sweden has made no  progress in these areas, which would require a  