EXECUTIVE SUMMARY In 2014, growth and employment in the United Kingdom (UK) were relatively unaffected by the general weakening of global activity. The economy continued to grow briskly at 2.6% in 2014 due to strong domestic demand. This was a marked improvement over growth of 1.7% in 2013. The labour market continues to perform robustly with employment expected to have grown at a rapid 1.9% in 2014, up from 1.2% in 2013. The unemployment rate continues to fall; from 7.6% in 2013 to a projected 6.3% in 2014. Inflation is on a downward trend and fell to 1.5% in 2014. This decline is expected to continue, aided by the fall in energy prices, to 1.0% in 2015.  This Country Report assesses the United Kingdom's economy against the background of the Commission's Annual Growth Survey which recommends three main pillars for the EU's economic and social policy in 2015: investment, structural reforms, and fiscal responsibility. In line with the Investment Plan for Europe, it also explores ways to maximise the impact of public resources and unlock private investment. Finally, it assesses the United Kingdom in the light of the 2015 Alert Mechanism Report, in which the Commission found it useful to further examine the persistence of imbalances or their unwinding. The main findings of the In-Depth Review contained in this Country Report are: • Household indebtedness continues to decline but remains high. High levels of household indebtedness leave the household sector exposed to risks in the short and medium term, and may amplify the impact of those risks should they materialise. However, the likelihood of risks occurring is considered lower than in 2014 as the strength of the economy and resilience of the financial sector have improved. • The pace of house price rises has gradually slackened throughout 2014 reflecting a softening in demand and modest rises in supply. The risk of further increases in house prices, followed by a sharp correction, has subsided but medium term risks remain should increases in supply react slowly to demand. Recent policy measures, including macro.prudential regulation, should help reduce the risk posed by a possible deterioration in lending standards and help safeguard financial stability and reduce the risks to the real economy.  • There have been a number of important recent initiatives to boost housing supply but it will take some time for the impact to be fully felt, therefore, the supply-demand imbalance remains. The shortage of supply relative to demand is likely to underpin higher house price levels, and higher household indebtedness, in the medium term than would otherwise be the case. Risks are mainly concentrated in the South East of England. Therefore, the macroeconomic imbalance associated with high household indebtedness remains but is lower than as assessed in 2014. The Country Report also analyses macroeconomic issues and the main findings are:  • Fiscal consolidation in the UK focusses mainly on expenditure cuts, accounting for approximately 80% of the measures implemented thus far. Total government expenditure as a share of GDP has been declining steadily and is estimated at 44% of GDP in 2014-15. However, weaker-than.expected tax receipts have meant that the deficit is falling more slowly than originally planned. Weak public investment levels suggest that there are trade-offs as regards consolidation choices. • Boosting private and public investment would help the UK increase productivity growth and improve competitiveness. In relation to investment in infrastructure, risks related to deliverability persist, as a large share of funding is expected to come from the private sector. Furthermore, public and private research and development continue to lag behind other advanced economies. • As regards access to finance, falling bank credit and insufficient competition in the banking sector are considered to be the main impediments. • Despite the robust performance of the labour market, there are several inter.Executive summary related challenges in certain areas. Specifically, skills under-use and youth unemployment remain structural challenges. There has been strong employment growth, including in low-paid sectors, during the economic recovery;  • Poverty indicators display adverse trends. The at-risk-of-poverty or social exclusion rate has grown between 2011 and 2013, and the severe material deprivation rate has also risen between 2009 and 2013; • Strong employment growth has been accompanied by sluggish productivity. Employers have expanded output by hiring additional workers without a matching increase in value added. On some measures, the UK has underspent on infrastructure relative to comparable countries which might hold productivity back. • The reasons for the decline in export share, including the role of competitiveness, were assessed in the 2014 In-Depth Review. The external sector is no longer considered a macroeconomic imbalance that requires monitoring and policy action. Overall, the UK has made some progress in addressing the 2014 Country-Specific Recommendations. During the past year, limited progress has been made in broadening the tax base, and fiscal consolidation remains an issue. Some progress has been made in relation to provision of infrastructure, notably the update of the government's national infrastructure plan. There has been substantial progress in providing finance to small and medium enterprises; for example, the British Business Bank has been established to provide them with alternative sources of finance. Some progress has been made in the housing sector with macro-prudential regulation being deployed by the Financial Policy Committee to manage the risks posed to the stability of the financial sector. In addition, the risks posed by the Help to Buy policy have fallen. Initiatives have been announced to boost supply. Some progress has been made in tackling youth unemployment, improving basic and vocational skills and investing in infrastructure. However, only limited progress has been made in reducing child poverty, and ensuring and improving the availability of affordable childcare. The Country Report reveals a policy challenge stemming from the analysis of macroeconomic imbalances. In relation to housing, although the risks associated with high household indebtedness and rising house prices have fallen, the supply of housing does not match the increasing demand in the medium term. Other challenges are: • The implementation of the apprenticeship reform is still ongoing. There are still challenges in tackling youth unemployment, the education-to-work transitions, the involvement of young people in taking up work experience and vocational training opportunities. • As regards access to finance, the impact of policy developments, and government investigations, already underway is not yet reflected in the outcomes, especially for SMEs. 