EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 



The UK has scope to raise stagnant productivity 
by increasing both public and private 
investment. Unemployment is at a record low and 
the UK has many strengths. However, 
productivity is weak due to deep-rooted policy 
challenges including low investment and skills 
gaps. The UK could boost potential growth 
through more radical action to enable sufficient 
housebuilding in areas of high demand and by 
delivering on its objectives to raise the quality of 
technical education and to upgrade transport 
networks (1). 

(1) This report assesses the UKís economy in the light of the 
European Commissionís Annual Growth Survey published 
on 22 November 2017. In the survey, the Commission calls 
on EU Member States to implement reforms to make the 
European economy more productive, resilient and 
inclusive. In so doing, Member States should focus their 
efforts on the three elements of the virtuous triangle of 
economic policy ó boosting investment, pursuing 
structural reforms and ensuring responsible fiscal policies. 

Growth is expected to be subdued in 2018 and 
2019. The slight slowdown in growth to 1.8 % in 
2017 was driven primarily by private consumption, 
as higher consumer price inflation squeezed real 
household incomes. The uncertainty around Brexit 
continues to weigh on business investment, while 
the depreciation of sterling in 2016 has produced 
only a modest boost to net exports. Based on a 
purely technical assumption of the status quo in 
terms of trading relations between the UK and the 
rest of the EU, growth is expected to slow further 
to 1.4 % in 2018 and 1.1 % in 2019. Private 
consumption and business investment are 
projected to remain subdued, with net export 
growth easing off, in line with developments in 
export markets. Risks to the baseline forecast are 
large and predominantly to the downside. 

Consumer prices rose sharply in 2017 following 
the 2016 depreciation of sterling. The 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices measure of 
inflation reached 3.0 % in December 2017, and 
inflation is significantly above the Bank of 
Englandís target. Inflation is expected to remain 
elevated in 2018, before easing in 2019. 

The headline labour market picture is positive. 
The employment rate (20-64) remained at a record 
level of 78.2 % in Q3-2017, while at 4.2 % 
unemployment is at its lowest level since 1975. 

The large current account deficit continues to 
pose external financing risks. The current 
account deficit widened to a record 5.9 % of GDP 
in 2016, and remains elevated. However, the 
composition of the deficit tempers risks associated 
with sizeable external financing needs. The UKís 
Net International Investment Position has 
improved due to valuation effects linked to the fall 
in sterling. However, to date the net trade response 
to weaker sterling has been disappointing. A 
persistently big deficit in trade in goods is offset 
largely but not fully by net service exports. 

Private-sector debt remains high, and consumer 
credit growth has been elevated since early 
2016. Following the financial crisis, UK banks 
have reduced debt and strengthened their balance 
sheets. The level of non-performing loans is quite 
low, although bank profitability remains weak. 
Lending to non-financial firms grew modestly in 
2017, as did lending to households that is secured 
on dwellings. Consumer credit grew more rapidly, 
alongside a fall in the household saving ratio. 
Although household debt remains high, debt 
service costs currently remain low. Signs of a 
moderation in house price growth should slow the 
growth of mortgage debt. 

Overall, the UK has made some progress in 
addressing the 2017 country-specific 
recommendations. There has been some progress 
on housing investment. The government is 
implementing a range of policies to boost housing 
supply. It announced further measures in the 2017 
Autumn Budget, including additional moves to 
make the planning system more supportive of 
residential development. The upward trend in 
annual housing completions continued in 2017, 
although new supply continues to fall short of 
estimated housing need and many barriers to 
housebuilding remain. There has been some 
progress on skills and apprenticeships. The number 
of apprenticeship starts apparently dropped in the 
second half of 2017, coinciding with the 
introduction of the apprenticeship levy. The 
quality of apprenticeships (measured by the level 
of qualification) appears to be improving, albeit 
from a low base. Other routes for progression in 
work are at a very early stage but backed by a clear 
political impetus. It is important that the ambitious 
intentions and plans are swiftly implemented. 


Regarding progress in reaching the national targets 
under the Europe 2020 strategy, the UK is 
performing well on greenhouse gas emissions. It 
has made good progress on renewable energy and 
energy efficiency However, the UK faces 
challenges in achieving the 2020 targets. 

The UK performs adequately on the indicators 
of the Social Scoreboard supporting the 
European Pillar of Social Rights. The post-crisis 
economic recovery has translated into a significant 
improvement in employment outcomes, bringing a 
large number of people back into the labour market 
and employment. However, there is untapped 
potential with high inactivity rates among certain 
groups. Many women work part time. Projections 
suggest that recent social reforms risk increasing 
in-work poverty and poverty among children. 

Key structural issues analysed in this report, which 
point to particular challenges for the UK, are: 

. High general government debt is a source of 
vulnerability. The deficit fell to 2.3 % in 
2016-2017, although deficit reduction is 
expected to stall temporarily in 2017-2018. The 
debt-to-GDP ratio is expected to remain above 
80 % and could increase if potential shocks to 
the economy materialise. The UK faces 
medium fiscal risks in the long term, linked to 
the projected impact of age-related spending on 
pensions, health and long term care. 
. Housing costs are high and housing supply 
still lags growth in demand. While house 
price growth has slowed in recent quarters, 
affordability has continued to decline due to 
low wage growth. Home ownership has fallen 
significantly among younger age cohorts in 
recent years, increasing intergenerational 
inequality. A cyclical recovery and government 
policy reforms have contributed to a continued 
pick up in residential construction. However, 
new housing supply remains insufficient, 
particularly in areas of high demand. The 
government recognises the problem and has set 
ambitious objectives to increase supply in the 
coming years. At the same time, the 
government has reaffirmed its commitment to 
limiting development around urban centres. 
. Labour market entry is easy for most 
people, but progression is difficult for some. 
Youth and long term unemployment are low 
and stable. However, some cohorts have a 
higher propensity to be stuck in low-wage, 
low-hours and/or low-progression jobs. Many 
new skills initiatives are targeting the flow of 
new entrants to the labour market. but a large 
share of the current work force is either low-
skilled or in jobs not matching their 
qualifications. Apprenticeship reform is 
underway but more focused on quantity targets 
rather than quality. Other upskilling and 
reskilling opportunities require strengthening. 
The National Retraining Scheme to reskill and 
upskill those who already have completed full-
time education, including those in work, could 
improve their future prospects but is yet to be 
implemented. 
. There are care- and poverty-related 
challenges for working-age families. 
Pressures on childcare and social care supply 
can affect female full-time employment. Other 
social policy outcomes, particularly for 
working-age families who receive in-work 
benefits, will be hit by previously announced 
cutbacks and reforms now being implemented 
in a context of heightened inflation. 
. Productivity is low and stagnant, due partly 
to low investment. The UK is an open 
economy with a high employment rate and 
many positive aspects to its business 
environment. However, labour productivity is 
significantly lower than in other developed 
economies, and no higher than it was a decade 
ago. Large parts of the economy perform 
comparatively poorly on the main drivers of 
productivity ó skills, investment and the 
adoption and implementation of efficient 
business processes. Private investment remains 
well below the EU average, particularly in 
equipment, and there remain impediments to 
the efficient allocation of capital and labour. 
. The UK has a significant challenge to deliver 
a modern network infrastructure that can 
meet future demand. The UK's road, rail and 
aviation networks have significant and growing 
capacity pressures. There is also an 
increasingly urgent need for higher investment 



